That same evening, I was safely sheltered at the Hotel France et Champagne, in Pieri's room.

Giuseppe Pieri has had no biographers thus far. The writers who have spoken of him incidentally, basing their accounts on trial documents, have so magnified his faults as to eclipse his fine and uncommon virtues. I myself, for a moment, considered him the principal, semi-voluntary cause of our ruin, and I did not always treat him with the serene impartiality to which he was, after all, entitled. I will not make his apotheosis now; but I will say that, contrary to the majority of civilized men, who have a polished surface and a rotten core, he had nothing of the commoner about him save for his surface.

In the brief days we spent in each other's company, following his open, trusting, impulsive nature, he revealed to me his every thought, every secret of his intimate life, and seemed happy to have found fertile ground upon which to pour the torrent of his speech, which was more than Tuscan, purely Lucchese. In spite of that strange, monotonous voice of his, his manner of speaking was anything but tedious; often, in fact, it proved most interesting. He knew how to make his less-than-chaste phrasing forgivable, intermingling it with flowers of practical philosophy that revealed his eccentric wit and his tumultuously lived life.

His freely expressed philosophical ideas, too frequently delivered with excessive emphasis, did not help to multiply the friends around him. Even today, despite the fact that certain doctrines have become so democratized, his words would generally be met with hostile faces. And yet his phenomenal, open-book sincerity and his way of acting in full harmony with his own convictions should be enough to raise him above a legion of minuscule men, the ballast of History, whose names have still filled the pages, whose nullity has had the honour of a pedestal.

I wish to adduce an example of that way of his. Pieri's wife resided in Paris; he had separated from her. But the complete cessation of all conjugal relations did not prevent him from holding her in profound esteem and from visiting her as a proven and faithful friend. To me, a recent bridegroom and imbued, on this subject, with entirely different ideals, who on a certain occasion when he spoke of it looked at him with astonished eyes, he clapped a hand on my shoulder and said something to this effect: "Young man, the love that seeks happiness in the satisfaction of the senses to the detriment of the happiness of others is not love, it is the egoism of savages. You are working so that a People may become the arbiter of its own destinies, and you are worthy of praise. But you would wish, you rogue of a god!, that the most beautiful, the noblest half of that People not be arbiter even of its own heart and of its own person! The tyranny of the male degrades the woman, who takes her revenge by repaying them with feigned kisses and betrayal; it leads to sorrows all the more terrible for being the better dissimulated; to sorrows that dissolve the integrity of the soul and have repercussions on the souls of the children; to domestic tragedies that are resolved with the pistol shot. My theory? It combines liberty with human dignity and, for the love that wanes, it substitutes the gratitude based on sweet memories of the past, the friendship based on reciprocal esteem."

In religious matters, Pieri revealed to me a mind devoid of all prejudice, not from convictions superimposed by reading, but by natural tendency. He had settled into serenity, I believe, out of necessity, as a light body detached from the gloomy bottom of a marsh must necessarily rise to the luminous surface. This atheism of his sometimes brought him into conflict with Orsini, who from the education he had received in his infancy had, like Mazzini, retained something nebulous that persisted in them both for as long as their lives.

In the short days preceding the attack, both Pieri and I tried to live as if nothing serious were in the air. We usually dined in a trattoria in the Montmartre gallery, and the frugal meal was preceded and followed by long and aimless walks. We would pay some visits to Orsini; but he appeared pensive, taciturn, and they were brief visits. The afternoon of Saturday (January 12th) was to be an exception. We found Orsini and Gomez dressed to the nines, with overcoats on and hats on their heads. As soon as he saw us, Orsini let slip an exclamation that seemed to carry away the impatience accumulated from a long wait. He asked us to accompany him. We went out and, along the way, he said he wanted to take us to the little square of the Opera to study, on the spot, a plan of action of his. We walked slowly along the rue Le Pelletier and, having arrived in front of the theatre, we stopped, as if to admire its architecture. There was a long silence. Felice Orsini broke it with these words: "My plan is perfectly suited to the locality." And, without making any gesture with his hands, which he kept constantly plunged into the pockets of his overcoat: "You, Gomez, will station yourself across the street, to the right, as close to the peristyle as you can manage. Pieri will place himself on the exact opposite side. Moretto and I will plant ourselves here in front, more or less where we are now. I know that the Emperor will shortly be attending a performance by Ristori. The imperial carriage must proceed, undisturbed, to the theatre. As soon as Napoleon dismounts, Gomez will throw his bomb. If it has its effect, everyone slips away by their own road as best they can, and we will all meet later on the piazza della Concorde, where I will give instructions on what is to be done. If it has no effect, one of two things will happen: either the Emperor will try to save himself by taking refuge in the theatre, and then Pieri will throw the second bomb at his feet and finish him; or he will retreat into the carriage and it will pull away at a gallop, and then Pieri will strike it from behind, and I and di Rudio from the side. That should be enough to shatter a small fort. But even assuming that the Emperor is able to proceed, either to the right or to the left, along the rue Le Pelletier, before he reaches the Boulevard Montmartre or the rue Rossini, he will find patriots who will know how to send him the greeting he deserves. Be that as it may, once the attack is accomplished, everyone, by different routes, to the piazza della Concorde!"

The following day, Sunday, Pieri proposed an excursion to Passy. The vast horizon of the countryside seemed to increase in the Tuscan patriot the need to expand and, to the exceptional bitterness of the day, he opposed an exceptional warmth of phrases, of images, of recollections. In that interminable sequence of words, the man of proud resolves yearning for liberty, the practical philosopher, now superimposed himself upon the sensual man, serene in his easy loves, now showed himself subordinate to him and as if eclipsed. Never had I found myself before such a complex amalgam of soundness and vanity.

Of all his revelations, the one that impressed me most was that which, in itself, was perhaps the most insignificant. Pieri had known Orsini in Birmingham, and it was from there that he had set out to come to Paris. On his journey, he had stopped in Bruxelles to greet a mistress of his. Under the impulse of emotions that make anyone prone to easy abandon, he had become, even more than usual, thoughtlessly expansive. To his mistress, who begged him to stay longer, he had replied that his immediate departure for Paris was irrevocable.

— What! you are going to France? And are you not afraid of falling into some ugly trap, you who were expelled from there?

And Pieri, in reply, affirmed that, this time, he was going with the hope of repaying, with a measure of coal, those who had persecuted him.

That evening, I was knocking at the door of Felice Orsini. A single glance was enough for me to understand that he was more pensive than I was. Despite this, I insisted on an immediate interview. He looked at me with searching eyes, but said nothing. And I, jumping into the subject with both feet, reminded him of his first, wise decision to keep the conspirators completely unknown to one another. That decision, I added, had been mocked and almost blown away by circumstances... our security had become precarious and ephemeral. I did not speak, in particular, of Pieri's imprudence, but I insisted on the probability that some imprudence had been committed. One had to take into account the unforeseen, but undoubtedly multiple, eventualities that could place in jeopardy not only our existence but the destiny of two Peoples, and I concluded by affirming that, in my opinion, we were wrong to attempt the execution of the enterprise with a superfluous number of participants. Two resolute men, even one alone, could suffice.

I also reminded him that the resolve to strike at the heart of the French reaction by suppressing Napoleon was not new in me... he knew it well, for he had full knowledge of the letter I had written as far back as 1854 to Giuseppe Mazzini. Why not let me carry out alone an enterprise to which I could claim a certain right of precedence? If I succeeded, our cause would have had nothing to lose; if I failed, other unknown, untouched forces, reanimated by the desire for revenge, would have renewed the attempt. The certainty of success lay in persistence.

— The imminence of the action, replied Orsini, not only persuades me that your fears are unfounded, but also makes second thoughts impossible. How, besides, do you expect an enemy destined to fall into the ambush at a trot, almost as if running to a triumph, to escape us? What remains is to wait! For the Emperor, by setting the evening, to give us, with his own hands, the signal to strike him. That is all!

I insisted, and pointed out to him that my plan grafted itself admirably onto his, diminishing the risks by its very simplicity. If he were to procure for me (and it should not be difficult for him) the uniform of a "sargent de ville", I would have mingled, in disguise, among the guards delegated by the city to protect the Emperor. Each section furnished a contingent, and those from one part of the city did not personally know those who came from the others... When the Emperor wishes to dismount from his carriage, one of these guards, by a custom that had become a right, hastens to open its door. Now let us see: Luigi Bonaparte proceeds, among his henchmen, to the peristyle of the theatre. I rush to the carriage door. I am a man of rank. He is getting out! It is a matter of an instant. To the Roman Republic, to the victims of the grapeshot of December 2nd! The history of popular vindications resumes its course from that moment!

Felice Orsini paced the length and breadth of the room. He was agitated, and on his most mobile face, thoughts chased one another, like flashes of lightning. He ended by planting himself before me... he picked up and threw back on the table several papers, then burst out: "It is too late, it is too late! And, on the other hand, equal the glory, equal the risk. Let us speak of it no more!"

With that refusal, he was irrevocably sealing his own destiny