FREE... in a year!" I had not said it merely out of selfishness, nor only out of pity, and much less out of boastfulness. My first escape attempt had been meditated upon precisely during those days at La Roquette. There I had made the acquaintance of an Englishman who was serving six months in prison for fraudulent bankruptcy. He was a man endowed with a certain culture, of few words; he possessed, from what I could gather, more than sufficient means. Like the great majority of his countrymen, he was interested in politics and hated Napoleon. He himself, so to speak, came to meet my own spirit and offered to help me with all his means. "In church with the saints, in the tavern with the gluttons!" And, on the other hand, if hypocritical society finds it convenient to take account only of a man’s faults in order to debase him, despite his virtues; I find it more logical, more fraternal, to pay mind to his virtues and to raise him up, despite his faults. Had my Englishman truly acquired his riches in a reprehensible way? To spend them to give a husband back to his widowed consort, a father to his son, was to return ill-gotten gains to good use. I accepted.

We had calculated that he would return to the free world before I was sent to Tolone. We knew that the condemned, before being transported to the tropical lands, make a stop of greater or lesser length at that penal colony. We had no map of the place, and concerting a well-defined plan proved a haphazard affair; but we were not ignorant of the fact that if it is possible to induce a human creature, for money, to commit base acts, it is equally possible to induce one, for money, to attempt acts of generous daring.

Upon leaving La Roquette, my Englishman was to go to Tolone. It would be easy to ascertain, after my arrival, the place where I was confined and the persons to whose custody I was entrusted. At the same time, he would organize a means of rapid transport, by sea or by land. Money, lavished freely, would break my chains, thus offering me the opportunity to take advantage of that means... from the French coast, Italy and Spain are not the ultimate Thule. The more I studied the character of my Englishman, the more I became convinced that he possessed qualities that made him capable of bringing the enterprise to a successful conclusion.

I shall say that the day of his liberation arrived very soon, and I, embracing him, clandestinely handed him a letter for Elisa... the only one, as I later learned, that she ever received from me.

A week later, I was transported by railway in a cellular compartment as far as Marsiglia, and from Marsiglia, by horse-drawn carriage, to Tolone. It was the month of April (1858) and nature was reflowering in a prodigious way when I was locked in a casemate, below sea level, and chained with other wretches to an iron bar fixed in the damp fortress wall.

Do you wish to know what occupation Count Carlo di Rudio had for the period of about seven months? I wore a red tunic and a pair of yellow trousers; I wore a green Phrygian cap, this being the mark of those condemned for life (those condemned for a term wore a red one); I was without moustaches and had my hair cut in stripes. I slept, when I could sleep, on a wide plank. The hours I was awake, I spent waging a furious hunt for the insects that tormented me and rubbing the shackle that bound me. This latter labor of mine was so persistent and tenacious that, a full four times, I succeeded in having myself taken to the blacksmith and thus traversing, holding my chain in my hands, a quarter of a mile in the open air... a full four times thus seeing the Sun again!

As at La Roquette, morbid curiosity exposed me to the humiliating visit of this or that personage. At that time, the Czarina was attempting to restore her ailing health by breathing the balsamic air of the Riviera. The officers of a Russian squadron, en route to Nizza, where it was to take the pale sovereign on board, landed at Tolone and wished to see the man who had attempted to kill Napoleon... the man who had inflicted upon their Fatherland the humiliation of Sebastopol. They offered to bestow upon me a sum of money to provide for my most pressing needs. But the Regulations granted me nothing but bread and water, and the jailers opposed it. So that I derived from it nothing but the sterile satisfaction of being able to say that even the steppes of Eastern Europe contributed their contingent to the swarm of importunate visitors.

But among my visitors there was one, of a completely different sort, who deserves a very special mention.

Sister Teresa had not been content with her first letter and my first reply. She had sent me at least a dozen. They all exhorted me to trust in God, to repent of my past misdeeds, to turn, with transport, to the wide arms of divine mercy that would surely not have repelled me. Annoyed to death, I had written to her a few days before leaving La Roquette that I had been brought up to believe in facts, only in facts. Words slid inexorably off my soul, and hers were nothing but words! I thought I had cut the comedy short... but it is not for nothing that one is worthy of the apparition of Christ. Unexpectedly, even in Tolone, I saw again the fine and elegant characters of my sister in God.

They announced to me, no less! the visit of a bishop traveling as a missionary to China. I should open all my thoughts to him. He was a holy man, filled with heavenly grace, and would not fail to "touch my heart."

One day, at a most unusual hour, the gate of the casemate opened and in came an old man of about sixty, wrapped in a violet-colored cloth. The jailer pointed me out and left. I found myself before the announced missionary bishop... who evidently proposed to begin his apostolic triumphs by rendering a service to the Empire with my conversion.

He opened the conversation by stating that he was in that place on behalf of Sister Teresa, and immediately added that, seconding the exhortations of that pious woman, he had provided, with sufficient liberality, for the earthly needs of my wife and my child.

At this point, I scrutinized his face intensely and saw nothing there but an expression of candid good-nature. And yet the holy episcopal lips had lied like those of a scoundrel.

Be that as it may, supposing he had well disposed my soul with this supposed benefaction, that most pure vessel of heavenly grace tried to spread the balm he had deposited on my breast and, in a calm voice, announced to me how Sister Teresa had also thought of me. He was the bearer of a gift from her. Without adding more, he drew from under his violet robe a rosary of coral beads bound in silver, from which hung a crucifix and a medal.

I observed it without extending my hand and, in a no less calm voice: "A most beautiful gift... if only I could pawn it and exchange it for tobacco. But many things are denied in here that are permitted to simple mortals. Thank Sister Teresa on my behalf and write to her that I have refused."

The bishop’s eyes flashed like an Inquisitor's. "My son," he said, "you will not at least refuse this other pledge of fraternal love. It is blessed by the Pope and will bring you fortune!" And here he dangled before my eyes a pair of satin scapulars, with the likeness of Christ embroidered in gold.

"Oh, Father! In this dismal place, with so much filth... What could they serve for, if not as a comfortable nest for my lice?"

He did not give up and, without uttering a word, he drew out and held out to me an elegant missal. But I observed to him that I had long since stopped praying and that, in that jumble of words, my mind would find no nourishment.

The conversation came to an abrupt end. The bishop put away his gifts and, turning his back on me, went away without a farewell, with a gait that sought to seem dignified and solemn. I believe he was thinking: "If the Chinese are all like this dog, I'm in for a fine time!"

Then, shrugging my shoulders, I looked at my companions in chains. Some observed me with a dumbfounded air, as if I were the devil; others, with sparkling eyes, as if my hair cut in stripes was not enough to hide from them the features of a hero. But I was neither a hero nor a devil. I was simply a reasonable man who, inspired by his own profound convictions, escaped the subtle arts of imposture.

I believe it opportune to narrate here, by analogy, an incident that occurred to my wife while I was already serving my sentence in Cayenna.

Nottingham, where Elisa had retired to spend her widowed days with her mother, was, and certainly still is, an episcopal see. The Catholics consider that bishopric an advanced fortress of truth against heresy and, fantasizing, they surround it with the serene air that inspires chaste thoughts... a sort of oasis where, by day, doves flutter; in the dark of night, luminous angels.

Unexpectedly, Elisa received an invitation to go to the bishop's palace on matters of the utmost importance. Mindful of my advice, she did not venture to go there alone. But here I think the words are better suited to the lips of my Elisa. He pressed the button of a bell and the lady immediately came. He asked her to retell, simply, the conversation she had with the bishop of Nottingham.

"There is not much to tell. I went to the bishop's palace with my mother. She was asked to wait in the antechamber; I was immediately led into Monsignor's study... a tall, thin man, all skin and bones. He received me with a contrite face and, unfolding a letter, which he took care not to hand me, he told me he was extremely sorry to have sad news to communicate. A colleague of his, in service at the penitentiary of Cayenna, had written to notify him of my husband's death, which had, moreover, already been confirmed by the press and by the French Authorities. Although the misfortune was irreparable and he sympathized with my inevitable sorrow, it was not without a profound and serene satisfaction in his priestly soul that he could assure me that you had sincerely repented of your past misdeeds, that you had expired acknowledging the sanctity of the religion of your fathers. On this subject you had indeed expressed the ardent desire that I, for my eternal salvation, embrace the Catholic religion and, if possible, become a nun. You then enjoined me, as an expression of your final, absolute will, to entrust our son to the care of some Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Institution, so that he might be raised in the principles that had sustained you in your misfortune and comforted you on your deathbed."

"And what did you reply to the excellent ecclesiastic?" "For a moment I found neither tears nor words. Then a flash crossed my mind and, looking at him intently, I said: 'Count Carlo di Rudio cannot have died thus. And since this is a lie, it is likewise a lie that he is no more. I feel it, my husband is alive!'"

"The priest crumpled the letter, threw it on the desk and, with a horrible face (which revealed the desire to burn me alive), clenching and unclenching his fingers as if they were talons, said through clenched teeth: 'Ah, if only we were in France!' I was seized by a great fright and, letting out a cry, I fled. I was so distraught that I could say nothing to my mother until we were on the street, far, far away!"

Thus, continued Count di Rudio, ended the attempt of the Catholic clergy to play the spy on behalf of the Second Empire.

While I, amid the horrors of the casemate, toiled to gnaw at the ring of my chain to catch a fleeting glimpse of the Sun, my Englishman worked, for his part, to carry out our understanding with a thoroughly Anglo-Saxon cunning and pertinacity. He had gathered all possible information on the place where I was confined and on the prison's habits; he had procured disguises; he had prepared places of temporary refuge; means of transport as far as the Pyrenees. With the help of I know not what woman, he had managed to place himself in direct communication with my immediate jailer. It had even been established that the day of my escape would coincide with that of my next trip to the blacksmith. Unexpectedly, I was brought before the Commander of the Arsenal.

I was informed that the next day I would be embarked on the frigate *La Durance*. "You are going to Cayenna," the Commander added in a dry tone, but not without an undercurrent of affability. "A dreadful climate! Europeans, forced to live in your conditions, cannot survive there for more than two or three years. I am authorized to tell you that if you reveal your accomplices, you will be immediately set free and provided with the necessary means to leave the borders of France. It depends on you whether you die in the penitentiary or live in the bosom of your family. Choose!"

I replied that I knew nothing. But even if I had had revelations to make, my opinion of the servants of the Empire was too poor to be able to place the slightest faith in their promises. I chose the penitentiary!

"As you please!" the Commander retorted gruffly, and gave the order for me to be taken back to the casemate.

The next morning I was on the high seas. My first escape attempt had failed!

***
### Chapter Twenty-Second

*La Durance* sailed on, carrying in her wide belly, divided into three decks, about three hundred convicts. Gomez and I were locked in the deepest one. But the Commander, who was an Orleanist and must not have harbored excessive antipathy for us, as soon as he learned who we were, had us transferred to the upper deck. Indeed, he pushed his benevolent partiality so far as to permit me to go up on deck from time to time to smoke freely... the Regulations prescribed the trifle of fifty lashes with a rope for anyone who did so in the compartments.

We put in at the island of Santa Cruz (Canaries) to take on water and remained there for two days, with windows closed, to remove any possibility of escape; then we proceeded directly to the Île Royale du Salut, where about two hundred convicts were disembarked.

I, Gomez, and another hundred derelicts transferred to a small steamer, and on the 11th of December 1858, after a day and a half of additional sailing, we were anchored before the Montagne d'Argent, which rises at the confluence of the Saint-Georges and the Oyapok, a relatively short distance from the border of Brazil. A free colony once flourished in that place, and free hands cultivated coffee there and every tropical fruit that can tempt the human palate. The French government had acquired it. Its officers occupied the planter's house; numerous thatched roofs, supported by poles, were erected there to shelter the convicts; the earth was pierced here and there, to bury therein, in slow agony, those refractory to discipline; some substantial buildings also arose for warehouses, for defense and for offense... the vanguard of civilization had been transformed into a penitentiary. But the natural beauties wonderfully concealed the hell that men had accumulated there.

The commander, a Major of the marine infantry whom the Republic had retired and the Emperor had reinstated and decorated with honors, hastened to receive us "into his charge" and to call our roll. When he pronounced my name, the officer who had accompanied us from the Île du Salut handed him a letter. It evidently concerned me. He read it and, eyeing me from head to foot: "Ah, so you are that..." (here followed a word fit for a pigsty!) "I am glad to see you here, and I swear to you that you will leave your skin here!"...

That boorishness was so out of place that even the guards made a grimace of disgust. But I did not lose my composure and, as if flattered by a compliment: "Thank you for the good wish, and I return it with all my heart!" He clenched his jaws; but he had Gallic ferocity, not the French spirit, and he remained silent.

That small incident convinced me that an ill wind was blowing for me at Montagne d'Argent and, from that moment, I resolved to repress my every impulse. The relative liberty that was granted to the disciplined prisoners—I thought—could offer me the opportunity to gain a greater one... the liberty of civilized men. But it was destined that my wise resolutions should vanish no later than the following day.

In the hut assigned to me were some fifty convicts... they formed my squad. I spent the first night sleeping in my hammock, a sleep tormented by a swarm of insects. At sunrise we set off, our bones aching, towards the forest. I wore a large straw hat, a pair of large wooden clogs, a pair of canvas trousers, a brown blouse, on the back of which was marked, in large characters, my number... the baptism of the penitentiary!

While crossing a swamp, I had the misfortune of losing one of my clogs, and the stumps of the reeds, cut at water level to facilitate the ford, sliced the sole of my foot. I had to contrive to cover three miles, limping and marking my every footprint with blood, until I arrived, last of my squad, in the heart of the forest... a splendid forest that, for a moment, almost made me forget that I was a convict and in agony.

A pile of logs. The task of the day was to transport them, on our shoulders, to the penitentiary, making five consecutive trips. I spotted a log that, by sight, seemed light; but it was "ironwood" and when I had it at the height of my knees, it fell noisily back onto the pile. Then, instead of retrying the test, I sat down, resolved to rest just long enough to recover my strength. The convict guard stood observing me and when he was certain of my thought: "Get up, you filthy swine! If you don't hurry, I'll kick your arse all the way there. A curse on you and all the Italian seed!"

If he had contented himself with goading me with a simple threat, I would probably have taken the thing with all philosophy; but that contempt for my nationality stirred in my breast the accumulated anger against the bullies who were making a mockery of it. I brandished my *sabre d'abattis* and gave a leap of which, considering my condition, I would not have thought myself capable. "Beware! Italians do not suffer insults! The first... I let pass! At the second, your pumpkin head will no longer see the sun from atop your shoulders!"

My companions, having left one by one, were already far away. We were alone, perfectly alone in a deserted place! He swallowed the pill, turning pale. Nevertheless, to show off his bravery, he asked for my name. "Be content with the number!" and I turned my back on him.

It was a bad start! But as chance would have it, my guard, though he could read more or less correctly, did not know how to write. To make his report, he had to resort to the clerk of the supervising Engineer, who, with the help of the number, verified my name in the registers and who I was. What sentiments animated him with regard to me, I do not know; but I learned that he persuaded my guard not to be cruel. And in his exhortations he deftly insinuated fear: "That man," he said, "fears neither Laws, nor punishments, nor God, nor the devil. If he swears vengeance, sooner or later, you are a dead man!"

On his return to the forest, the guard called me aside. "We have certain types at the penitentiary!... But I know how to make my distinctions." And to prove it to me, he asked pardon for his harsh words and granted me leave not to work, neither then nor later. I was to hide myself daily in the thicket... and reappear at the last departure of my squad. And he extended his right hand, as if to seal a pact.

Thus, for a good month, I passed the hours destined for work stretched out amidst a prodigious vegetation, smoking a cigarette, listening to the complicated rustling of the forest. In my eyes, in those hours, there was a fantastic intertwining of patterns never before seen... enormous leaves cut from velvet, trunks as tall and straight as minarets; flowers that seemed proud of their own colors enslaved strange insects to their ill-concealed loves; birds with metallic reflections, emerging from the rustling shadows, passed over my head with wings spread, like lightning. There were grottoes of a deep green, full of mystery; there were majestic vaults, dripping with dew and aromas, from which the Sun gazed placidly, lordly, as if watching that every blade of grass had its due... The Sun which, adored, consciously or unconsciously, in all ages, by all Peoples, had, with secular energy, raised up to itself this temple, worthy of a God. Oh, how beautiful the Earth is when it is not disfigured by the greed of man!... A temple worthy also of Elisa!... Her image, intensely recalled, dominated me as if she were present!

It was in that forest and in those hours that I meditated upon my second escape attempt. The plan I finally settled upon came from the primitive art of the Indians who roamed the southern regions of Guiana: to fell a large tree, to hollow it out so as to fashion a capable pirogue. With it I would ascend, by night, the Oyapok for a distance of fifty miles and then cross the Saint-Georges, to land on the soil of Brazil. Having escaped the pursuit of the French Authorities, I would probably have to face the ferocity of the savages and, undoubtedly, the almost insurmountable obstacles of the unexplored regions and the climate. But the prize was worth the risk!

None of this could even be initiated without the help of several accomplices. I sounded out the soul of Antonio Gomez. But the ardent political conspirator, satisfied with his position as assistant canteen-keeper and probably fearing the worst, pretended not to understand me. It was necessary to resort to less noble material. By what criteria to choose it? How to acquire over it the necessary ascendancy to bind it to my intentions?

In this case too, my lucky star, more than my own wisdom, came to my aid.

The penitentiary received its provisions of fresh meat from Brazil. At more or less fixed periods, a sailing ship would arrive with a cargo of bovine beasts. The beach, which gradually died into the Ocean, did not afford it sufficient depth to moor near the mainland, so the anchor was dropped offshore, at a distance of about three miles. The guard would then choose one convict from each decury and form a special squad that would proceed laboriously, with the water above their waists, up to the vessel. The wild oxen, enraged, were thrown into the sea, and the men pushed them, with great shouts and great lashes, into a stockade in the penitentiary.

Once that work began, it proceeded without interruption until the unloading was complete, even skipping a few meals if necessary. At Montagne d'Argent, we ate by decuries. The chief received the provisions, thinned by the sordid speculation of the officers, and presented them, on a sort of table, in the ten mess-tins. Each convict ran to his own and devoured it, seated on some step, or on a tree trunk, or on the bare earth. On unloading days, the chief of the decury was obliged to guard the ration of the absent convict and to hand it to him upon his return.

Chosen to lend a hand in that devilish work, one day I made my final return at eight in the evening, when my decury was already snoring in their hammocks. Hunger, sharpened by the incessant exercise, the long bath, the harsh sea breeze, had become ferocious. I shake the chief of the decury, I raise a small uproar, and he, showing me his fist instead of the mess-tin: "*Tais toi, Italien de m...*" (Cambronne's word).

I chew on nothing and remain silent. The evening of the following day, I get in line with the decury and wait around the table. When the chief arrives, holding the pot overflowing with soup, I dash forward and give it a mighty kick. The chief remains stupefied, arms outstretched, hands empty. "It takes," I say, "nine Frenchmen to make one Italian fast, but a single Italian is enough to make nine Frenchmen fast!"

Now it is the others who raise an uproar. The guard, one Cosson, runs up and, having inquired about the matter, asks me brusquely: "Why, instead of taking revenge, did you not submit your report?"

"Because Italians do not play the spy!"

Cosson, stealing Solomon's trade, sentenced both the chief of the decury and Count Carlo di Rudio to fifty lashes of the rope. But my resolve and, above all, my proud reply, had suddenly elevated me in the estimation of those wretches. They surrounded the guard and said so much that he agreed to swallow his sentence. From that day, the convicts condescended, of their own goodness! to treat me fraternally as worthy of their brotherhood; from that day it became a relatively easy task for me to study the various humors, to choose eight individuals who loved liberty so much as to cheerfully face any danger in the attempt to regain it.

We would leave our hut at night, crawling like beasts emerging from their lair, to deceive any eyes that might still be awake. We proceeded by different routes to a pre-established location on the edge of the forest; then, united, we would advance into its labyrinths. From the very first night, we had marked our path with signs almost invisible to other mortals, thus warding off the danger of getting lost.

A tree of gigantic proportions was cut at the base with relatively little effort; but, in falling, it landed in the dense growth and remained leaning there. We had to climb it and hollow it out while clinging on... a complication that required precious time. We ended up deciding to resort to fire. The light could not be seen from the penitentiary and the smoke was rendered invisible by the night; but among so much resinous vegetation, so many dead shrubs, so many splinters, so much detritus accumulated over centuries, the operation required great prudence, or we would have fed a fire so rapid and vast that even the deluges of the tropics would have had difficulty taming it.

That nocturnal enterprise of ours constitutes, for me, one of those incidents whose impression only death can erase. We were not in that land as pioneers of civilization, and some might even ironically observe that we were not the stuff of missionaries. But the setting—oh, the grandeur of the setting, rendered ineffable by the silent night, how it penetrated, with its own essence, into ours, and how it transformed us! Around us, there was nothing that had not been born and grown in the most boundless liberty, and liberty became almost tangible in every atom of air we breathed. It seemed to me that my muscles, as they toiled, exhaled from their every fiber something luminous, as if they were returning to things the uncontaminated life that things lent us. There were moments when I could have sworn I was as vigorous and eternal as the virgin forest. And we became such a homogeneous part of the environment that, after the first few nights, innumerable troops of monkeys, attracted by the glow of the resin, came to contemplate and almost to encourage our work, cheering it on.

After a couple of months, or a little more, we managed to drag into a bend of the river, and to hide among the lianas, a canoe seven feet wide and twenty-five feet long. It floated wonderfully. "And now," I exclaimed, when we parted full of enthusiasm, "to the oars and the sail!"

Unexpectedly, an event to which at first no one paid serious attention disrupted the entire penal colony and with it all my hopes.

In broad daylight, with a clear sky that is a whole lyric poem, with a sun capable of hardening ostrich eggs with its direct rays... a sentinel is seized by strong tremors. Replaced as quickly as possible, he was seen to walk with slow, trembling steps into the antediluvian shack that bore the pompous name of "Cabinet of Decency." He emerged from it ashen, distraught. He stated that, however much he strained, he had not managed to pass a single drop of water. The convicts laughed loudly... the thing seemed so droll to them! By evening, the poor man had gushes of coagulated blood, black as coal... two days later he was a corpse!

But even before he had drawn his last breaths, five, seven, ten convicts, though showing a high temperature on the thermometer, were trembling like leaves. The penitentiary was invaded by yellow fever.

The catastrophe was swift beyond all telling. In those days, it was believed that the seat of the disease was in the intestines; the remedies, very scarce and wholly inadequate for the vastness of the epidemic, were, for greater misfortune, applied with erroneous criteria. The Commander gave the order to open the warehouses and the cellar and leave them at the full disposal of the healthy. From that cellar, wide-open and black, there seemed to me to issue the sensation of fatality. If the yellow fever was not crouched in there, it had some mysterious ally within. The convicts were inexorably driven there by vice and by fear. They bestialized themselves there and passed from drunkenness to delirium; from delirium to nothingness!... with a death all the more swift, the more robust they were.

The arrangements for the victims were very simple: to throw them, without ceremony, into quicklime.

Every evening, the head guard went to report to the Commander's house.

One night, the Commander's wife and two children died almost simultaneously, and he ceased to take an interest in my health. Not long after, it was the head guard who ceased to go to the usual report. He had too easily yielded to the temptations of the cellar, and when he was found stretched out on the beaten earth, it was suspected at first that he was simply drunk. But his gums were covered with bloody foam... he died without having regained either speech or a glimmer of consciousness, and he was one of the many I had to grasp by the feet. "One, two, three..." Before casting him in, I would have liked to say a "Requiescat!"... he had spared me fifty lashes of the rope. But down there in that abyss... it would have seemed an irony!

I lent a hand to bury, one by one, in that manner, my eight accomplices in the escape attempt, and others, and others... I counted to over a hundred; then I became confused and counted no more. Some wretch, who already seemed to have passed the boundary beyond which one no longer suffers, as soon as he was thrown into that horrible common grave, was seen to revive and writhe in agony!

When the fever, finding no more flesh to gnaw, disappeared, the French Deputies raised, in Paris, the usual humanitarian clamor. But the Minister replied to them, with an air of triumph, that he had already given the appropriate orders to transport the entire Colony to the Île du Salut. And in fact, one evening, we see outlined against the twilight, the black streak of smoke from a ship that was proceeding, at full steam, towards our shore. It was the "Abeille," bringing us the orders of His Excellency. The following day the entire Colony was on board... Of over six hundred men, between convicts, soldiers, civil employees, and servants, we were reduced to sixty-three! Most of the survivors had already suffered from yellow fever at other times and on other shores, which had, it seems, made them resistant, if not absolutely invulnerable; several, shadows of their former selves, showed they had been just then touched, if not cut down by it... among them, Antonio Gomez... Oh, how transformed was his good-natured priest's face! Only three had not had their blood infected by it, neither then nor before. Among the three was the convict di Rudio! From the deck of the "Abeille," around which the Ocean already foamed and broke, I cast a final glance at the Montagne d'Argent and think, with profound regret, of my canoe that was floating, solitary and motionless, under the thick lianas. The landscape shrinks rapidly. The hell that men had accumulated there was no more; what remained was one of its most funereal consequences, the vast charnel house from which we had miraculously escaped. Nature, indifferent, spread enchanting hues over so much horror, and in the scintillating air her mysterious courtships vibrated