ON the evening of the twelfth, the chaplain Hughon came to pay me his usual visit. He was grave, grave, grave. I spoke to him of our rejected appeal and he became awkward. Then the suspicion of the sad reality flashed upon me and I resorted, to ascertain it, to several subterfuges. But Hughon promptly assumed the air of an innocent and, under the cover of that simple artifice, became unassailable. Perhaps my every suspicion would have evaporated if, in taking his leave, my visitor had not extended his hand to me. It seemed to me that those fingers traced mysterious signs in the air, so visibly did they tremble.

I awaited the return of Saturno who, of the two guards, seemed to me the more candid and, without even giving him time to take off his cap: "Saturno," I said, "I know that tomorrow morning I will be led to the scaffold. Heed me and see to it, you who are a good man, that you execute my last will to the letter. At five o'clock you will wake me."

At this he began to protest. Why had I gotten such foolishness into my head? The appeal rejected, there was still, thanks to our patrons, much fighting to be done and before... eh, eh!... that would take some doing!

— My friend, Monsieur Hughon wished to confess me and instead... I have confessed him. He has revealed everything to me!

At this, Saturno, who to give emphasis to his eh, eh!... was still gesticulating, let his arm fall, as if I had broken it off. "He has revealed everything to you? That is against the Regulations and he should not have done it." He stood for a while with his eyes downcast, then murmured: "Since you know everything... very well then, yes! now nothing else remains for you but to die manfully, as you have lived."

Then in my soul there suddenly fell a great silence and almost a great darkness; but in that kind of void, life still manifested itself powerfully through an instinct that impelled me to long for something darker, more silent. "The sooner the better!..." is Orsini's expression; only then did I comprehend its entire meaning.

"At five o'clock precisely! I have much, much to write. My last thoughts, from the prison, to my relatives and to Elisa; my last thoughts, from the scaffold, to the Fatherland... And you?... Take this!" (I kissed him). "Tomorrow, at this hour, think of me. You will say: Human miseries touch him no more!"

Saturno was punctual. My first sensation, on that memorable day, was caused by the extreme pallor of his face. I wrote to my father; I wrote to my wife's relatives, commending that unhappy woman to them from the depths of my heart. Six o'clock struck on the Roquette clock.

A little later, ten or twelve people entered the adjoining large room. I recognized, among them, the chaplain Hughon and the Prison Director. They went to Orsini's cell and I heard them announce his final hour. The Prison Director then pronounced, in a low voice, a few phrases, the meaning of which was made clear to me by Orsini's reply. A judge was ready to receive the revelations of the condemned man, and he had been exhorted to make a general confession. The martyr's reply resounded in the sepulchral silence, subdued but distinct: "Felice Orsini knows how to die, he does not know how to be an informer!"

Then came Pieri's turn and his nerves gave a jolt. "He was old, he was bound; but he would have had the heart..."

The Prison Director admonished him courteously and he immediately recovered himself. "So it is," he said, "to die at once, to die in a few years, what does it matter? My executioners too shall die..." He added that he intended to plunge into eternity singing.

My turn came. I replied calmly that Count Carlo di Rudio was ready; an expression which later, in the official reports, was attributed to Orsini. As soon as I had closed my lips, I made out more clearly in the semi-darkness the man who had accompanied the Prison Director into my cell. He was an old abbot... A pearl, perhaps. But to me, so ill-disposed towards all that recalls the clergy, he had the effect of an enemy come to ascertain, *de visu*, my final features. And since death was near and certain, I could well, without fear of causing harm to anyone, give free vent to my feelings. He approached me and made to speak. I imagined he wished to exhort me to die as a Christian and I forestalled him: "I prefer," I said, "to consecrate my last thoughts to my wife and my child. As for your God, I shall see him, if he exists, but only to tell him by what sort of ministers he has the foolishness to be represented on this earth."

We were led into the large room. Our hands were unbound. The faces were grave, as of people tragically moved... the rest, almost a scene of friends bidding farewell to friends on the eve of a long journey.

Pieri, quite determined to consider the matter an ordinary event, did not wish to renounce his breakfast. The appropriate orders were given. While waiting, there were even some introductions. I learned in this way that Hughon would be Orsini's spiritual comforter; the chaplain of the Conciergerie, Pieri's; the abbot set at my heels was chaplain of the House for Urchins.

An elegant tray was brought in, with coffee and rum. Felice Orsini sipped some of the latter, toasting the health of the Prison Director. At this point, my "comforter", humanely overlooking my harsh rebuff, offered me a small glass; but had the poor taste to observe that it would give me courage. I refused out of pride, retorting that Italian patriots had no need of artificial courage. Then it was a contest to ask each other for small mementos. The three executioners, standing erect and taciturn along the wall, observed us with a strange insistence.

Suddenly the Director drew his watch and made a sign to the guards. The Regulations, heedless of consciences, required us to attend Mass. Felice Orsini walked mournfully towards the prison chapel. I protested and Pieri added his impetuous speech to my curt refusal. Those present looked at each other and the Director shrugged his shoulders and ended by compromising. Orsini's absence was very brief. As soon as he returned, they led us towards the Chancellery, from which we passed into an adjoining room. Upon entering, Pieri, who was a few steps ahead of me, turned and said to Orsini: "Well, my old fellow?" Orsini raised his head, looked at him intently and replied: "Calm, calm!" They were the first words that those two men, made brothers by ideals and by martyrdom, had exchanged since their arrest... and they were the last!

We were in the hands of the executioner. They shaved the nape of my neck; they made me put on an open-necked shirt; they removed my shoes with their own hands. Identical preparations, executed rapidly, left Orsini absorbed in his thoughts; but the eloquent man from Lucca became almost cheerful from it... a strangeness of the nerves! He wished to see himself in a mirror and his executioner, a dandy probably, despite his vile trade, drew a small mirror from his pocket and offered it to him. He looked at himself at his leisure and, smiling, exclaimed: "You have done me up like an old *cocotte*!" While they were removing his shoes he broke into a frank laugh and said: "Fortunately I washed my feet!"

As for me, why should I not say it! Those moments were extremely painful for me. For several years my life had been a sequence of strongly-coloured events; but every trace of them seemed suddenly erased by the memories of childhood that assailed me in a throng. And I saw again my poor mother, all tenderness and all smiles, as when on a feast day she would dress me and, contemplating me, would be pleased with herself. What a contrast!

But Count di Rudio was not to be seen, at such a moment, with tearful eyes, and if some tear tried to appear, pride took care to drive it back into the depths and to dry it up.

While they were wrapping my head in the black veil, Giuseppe Pieri was already leaving without a word. But I reached him in time to hear him pronounce that phrase which, slightly distorted, later served almost as a pretext to demonstrate his megalomaniac and bizarre mind. To me it seemed instead, and still seems, the virile expression of a patriot who, having accomplished his mission to the limit of his strength, feels himself lightened of all his perishable and vulgar parts, and almost sublimated by martyrdom.

The chaplain of the Conciergerie had taken his arm, as if there were need to support him. He, without even turning his head: "One is not afraid when one goes to Calvary!" And he set off between the two filthy supports of every tyranny, the priest and the executioner... and I saw him no more. But I distinctly heard his voice intone, in the courtyard, the hymn of the Girondins: "To die for the Fatherland". He went to the scaffold, as he had promised, singing!... it is raining.

I am in the courtyard... it is raining and snowing. Weather that reconciles me to the idea of the imminent warm shelter underground. I pass by a company of prison guards, lined up, in the act of presenting arms... the rifles have their muzzles pointed to the ground, the stock in the air. The great door was wide open; the scaffold, erected a few steps from the pavement, intercepted my view; but not so much that I could not discern in the square a considerable force of infantrymen, of light cavalry, of artillery, arranged as if for imminent action.

I had my hands tied behind my back and secured, moreover, to the bonds that fastened my feet. I proceeded with steps that were perforce small and slow. The executioner, on my right, was a full head taller than I; the old priest, on my left, must, with his white hair, have strangely contrasted with my dark, restless youth. He murmured prayers, looking at his crucifix. I had expressed the desire to take a few puffs of smoke and it had been granted me. But the water and snow, which I trod on with bare feet, which fell on my bare shoulders, provoked shivers that I strove in vain to repress, and that apparent weakness, irritating me, induced me to bite rabidly on the stem of my pipe.

Near the great door, the field of my vision widened and I saw the windows and I saw the roofs crowded with people. The spectacle of unfortunate virtue, said the Greeks, is worthy of the Gods and, to witness it, men had paid as much as a thousand francs for the hire of a balcony. The mood of that multitude? "It"—says the official report—"remained constantly calm and silent during the great and legitimate expiation." In truth, a robust voice from on high cried out: "People, hats off! This is the punishment of heroes!" A scuffle broke out in the square. They were attempting, I believe, to surround the house from which that humane protest had come. But just then, my attention was turned elsewhere... the unexpected happened!

A man on horseback had entered through the great door... he was dressed in civilian clothes, his chest covered with decorations. He leapt from the saddle and guards and soldiers saluted him in military fashion. It was Monsieur de Collet, the Empress's major-domo. He came near me, stared into my face and, noticing my trembling, said: "It is cold, Signor Rudio!" I replied: "Yes, but they will not leave me time to catch a cold." A puff of smoke struck him full in the face. "Pardon me; my hands are tied and besides... it is the last!" — "Oh not at all; you shall smoke again!" He murmured a few words in the executioner's ear first, then in the old priest's, and both, slow and silent, moved away. Then, turning anew to me, as I questioned him with my expression: "I will come to your cell around nine o'clock and I will explain." I turned on my heel and found myself face to face with Felice Orsini.

He slowed his pace: "What is this?"

— They are sending me back to prison. I know nothing more.

— And Pieri?

— He is up there!

— Better two than three!

We continued on opposite paths... he to fertilize, with his blood, the ideal of the Fatherland; I towards the prison... and that return to life came to me as painfully as an act of arrogance, so prepared was I for death. After a few steps, I turned my head and, by a singular correspondence of souls, Orsini also turned. "Farewell!" he said, with a nod of his head. The black veil that enveloped it, made dense and opaque here and there by its folds, hid his face so that it already seemed to me half lost in the mysterious shadow of eternity.

I found the large room and the cell crowded with soldiers and officers. A group was busy around my bed, upon which lay my faithful guard, Saturno, fainted and convulsing. I made my way thither and, while a pitiful hand unfastened my arms, I kept calling him by name. My voice seemed more effective than the splashes of water and the salts... He opened his eyes, looked at me as if in a dream, then his face lit up with a light that revealed a profoundly sincere friendship. Suddenly, he assailed me with these words: "The bet! The bet!... you have lost!... you will pay for the champagne!"

"Later, my friend. This is an hour of grief. Out there, men are dying!" As if to confirm my words, the Roquette clock sounded: seven chimes. A sepulchral silence fell over the prison. The tragic hour gives strange clairvoyance... the officers uncovered their heads. In that moment, the blade of the guillotine... the heads... the vile basket...

Count di Rudio, overcome with emotion, could not continue. The insufficiency of his heart, which already undermined his robust old age, took his breath away. I knew that to observe him in such straits irritated him, worsening the affliction, and it was with a true sense of relief that I heard the swift step of Signora Elisa. She entered and did not notice the gravity of the moment. She was extending her arms and her left hand covered her right palm. She smiled with her lips, she smiled with her blue eyes, as if she had a great contentment in her soul and wished to break it into small pieces and give us a part. She uncovered her palm and revealed... two huddled chicks, of a luminous whiteness. Who remembers the white mother hen that was brooding in the courtyard? "They have hatched!" said the lady, still smiling. Those two atoms of life looked at us in wonder, as if to say: "Who are you?"

I turned my head... the Californian sun, near to setting, was spying through the green foliage. My sad eyes, intolerant of light, closed; but the reddish disc remained imprinted on my retina. Oh inflamed fantasy! oh vividness of recollection! In that blood-redness, the severed head of Felice Orsini appeared... Held by the hair in the executioner's fist, it was gasping, without breath, that last, fateful cry: "*Viva l'Italia! viva la Francia!*"

My lips did not move, but my soul let out a cry: "Oh how much the Fatherland has cost us!"