I pushed on as far as Zurigo, where I found a nucleus of compatriots who had, by exile, escaped the reactionary storm that followed the February uprisings. Among them was Radonitz, who received me with great courtesy. He made not the slightest allusion to the incident at Locamo. I also went to pay a visit to Caronti. His words could not have been more flattering; but at first sight of me, his face had taken on an expression of wonder, not free from a tinge of disquiet. Perhaps, I thought, it is my imagination. Giuseppe Mazzini had so warned me against him!...

That dealer in trinkets, a bankrupt from Como, lived in Zurigo in great luxury, at the expense of a rich lady, a chocolate manufacturer. He had, however, contrived to set up a modest factory for felt hats, and several Italians found there the means to earn their livelihood. I became one of their number and it seemed to me a ray of good fortune. But sniffing the air, I was not long in discovering something heterogeneous. There were handshakes that amounted to a mere contact of the skin; evasive answers; monosyllables, clean in themselves, but which acquired a sly flavour from the grimace of the face that accompanied them. On the whole, a coldness, such a coldness!... even at our afternoon meal, when our lips exchanged more spontaneous phrases, the mysterious threads that connect souls were wanting.

Of what, precisely, was I accused? Perhaps of having come there to circle about their bread and to subtract a small portion of it?

Things changed suddenly, and so radically as to make me suspect an understanding. But what, and why?... The angularities vanished; they addressed me familiarly; they clapped me confidentially on the shoulder, they offered me tobacco... it seemed they had finally decided to consider me, in all and for all, as one of them. So much so that one Saturday, they proposed a nocturnal pleasure trip on the lake. A few strokes of the oar, four tankards, maybe eight, a patriotic chorus under the starry sky. It would be like reliving, beyond the Alps, life in the fair country where our sweethearts languished.

So as not to seem discourteous, I accepted. As chance would have it, to remedy I know not what oversight, I returned to the factory that very evening. To my great surprise, I saw it lit up. As I drew near I distinctly heard the agitated voice of the exile Orioli, saying: "By God, I'm not for it! I would no longer have the courage to think of my poor old mother!" I entered, and it seemed as if a hand of iron had gagged every mouth (1).

From that day, no one spoke to me again of the lake, nor of the tankards, nor of the starry sky. Why, I did not know, nor did I care to investigate. Nevertheless, I became certain that the sudden cordiality of my companions was simulated; that I found myself, like an intruder, alone and hated in their midst. I ended by feeling disgusted by it and decided to leave for Parigi.

An unwelcome guest? Not entirely. Caronti, honest or dishonest as he may have been, had procured work for me; I believed it my duty to pay him a farewell visit. I thus procured for myself a new surprise. On my arrival in Zurigo, he had received me with cheerful and courteous words, but with a face that revealed his disappointment; now, as soon as he knew the reason for my visit, he poured forth a deluge of phrases expressing regret; but his entire sensation could not be contained, and it imprinted his face with signs that I deemed indisputable. My departure caused him intense pleasure.

I arrived in Parigi in December (1853) with two francs in my pocket and a letter of recommendation for a certain Zappa, a hat-maker from Torino, which had been given to me by my factory foreman, the only person in Zurigo who had shown me any sympathy. I did not go far on two francs; but the letter served me well. Zappa, a man of liberal opinions and a generous heart, immediately offered me hospitality. I had to make do with sleeping on a mattress in the kitchen; but penniless and at that season, the offer was anything but contemptible. All the more so as I found a way to repay him, by giving Italian lessons to the lady of the house.

Signora Zappa was French. She had ideas that were more than liberal, they were revolutionary. They were enough to establish the most cordial relations between us. She was not young, she was not beautiful; but she retained a grace whose charm was not easy to escape. When she spoke of the 2nd of December, in which she had taken an active part, and of the fierce repressions which, by good fortune, she had managed to evade, she became eloquent and, in the heat of her recollections, forgot even the corsets that she manufactured and to which, to tell the truth, she owed her popularity more than to her heroism.

So as not to live at the expense of those good people, I bestirred myself and ended by finding a position near the Bastiglia bridge. It earned me two francs a day. What position? For fourteen hours straight I turned, by the strength of my arms, the wheel of a carousel.

Having my hands on the wheel did not prevent me from having my eyes on politics. And at that time, even for one not in France, to occupy oneself with politics was to occupy oneself with Louis Napoleon.

The *coup d'état*, regarded with execration by clear consciences, blessed by the Pope, was received by the other Sovereigns as a great feat, combined with enviable perspicacity. The blood shed was not of that deemed blue, and the stupor which seized liberal France was, in their eyes, peace restored. And since Louis Napoleon freed the reactionary Governments from the spectre of the Republic, too often confused, and artfully so, with that of terror, it was perfectly natural that the reactionary Governments should hasten to converge their gaze benevolently upon Louis Napoleon, to recognise his advent, to expect great things of him.

After the *coup d'état*, the Dictatorship! Napoleon was too shrewd to abuse it without counterposing to the odious persecutions a series of measures apt to entice the multitude. France was overflowing with arms ready to raise the barricades. Unable to chain them, he proceeded, with sagacious haste, to win them over. By an impulse starting from Parigi, every centre in France, large and small, was seized by a fever of loans and public improvements. And the wave of well-being that spread through the working classes was given a perceptible increase by the sanitary Laws intended to improve their housing; by the reshuffling of taxes which, lifted from items of first necessity, were laid upon those of luxury. To this may be added the generosity of agricultural loans.

Throughout France, the cannon shots had thus been succeeded by those of the hammer, and the moral effect, which naturally sprang from the improved economic conditions, was reinforced by the splendid promises that kept hope green, that led one to suppose that this unexpected period of extraordinary prosperity would be lasting. Louis Napoleon, to hear him tell it, abhorred war. He proposed many conquests, but they were the conquests of Peace... lands to be reclaimed, vast tracts to be opened to cultivation, ports to be deepened, canals to be dug, rivers to be made navigable. In these useful and glorious enterprises, the sword would yield primacy to the tools of labour, and every peasant, every worker, animated by good intentions, would become his faithful warrior.

Concepts worthy of praise! But to be able to believe them, it was necessary to erase from the mind every sad memory; to lose sight of the fact that that fatal man consumed half the day dissimulating, with flattering phrases, the evil actions he reserved for himself to carry out in the other half.

Unfortunately, from the multitudes, compelled almost in perpetuity to consecrate every activity to satisfying, with great difficulty, the needs of the stomach, it is not reasonable to expect a cult of the prescient and pertinacious ideal. The popular soul proceeds to holy vindications only under the impulse of exceptional circumstances, and therefore in bursts, necessarily as tumultuous as they are fleeting. And it is a great thing when it does not attempt to make up for lost time by disfiguring its magnanimous wrath with ferocious manifestations. Then ineluctable need drives the herd back to graze... the soul postpones its strivings toward the better to better times, and falls asleep again.

The French People did not understand, or did not wish to understand, that every new prince, having risen by tasting crime and inclined to perpetuate it, does not attempt it until, by astutely practising virtue, he has given the evil seed time to secure its own roots. Laborious digestion dulled the thought, the rosy hues of the present prevented the intuition of the menacing phantoms that would gather on the horizon. And when the servile Senate re-established, in the person of Louis Napoleon and his male heirs, the imperial dignity, the multitude hastened to ratify it. Almost eight million Yeses... a slender minority of two hundred and fifty-three thousand Noes.

On the 1st of December 1852, a single year after having stained his hands and soul in the blood of his own fellow citizens, Louis Napoleon donned, at Saint Cloud, the crown of France and in assuming it, engraved upon History the name of Napoleon III.

The Empire reconstituted, the Constitution retouched, the various branches of Government assumed, in appearance, their regular function; in reality, France continued to be ruled as a Dictatorship... veiled as you will, but no less absolute.

The Prince Consort, who came from Londra in the spring of 1854 to cement the friendship that was taking shape between England and the new Empire, had occasion to express, on this subject, his high wonder. Napoleon himself candidly confided to him that he never permitted his Ministers to gather to discuss public affairs. Each individual Minister dealt directly with him on any matter of importance, and what he had decided with one was rarely confided to another.

This entirely personal government, reputed pernicious even by the old sovereigns, induced us liberals to formulate, upon the future of France, the darkest prognoses. The fixed idea, upon which the policy of Napoleon III was to be hinged, immediately became manifest... to emulate the great intellect who had drawn his own house from nothing; who had impressed deep footprints upon so great and so select a part of the world. He was girding himself for the arduous enterprise with an unbridled ambition, with an immeasurable craving for intrigue, an absolute lack of faith in his given word and in treaties, a corruption apt to undermine far greater constitutions; the absence of every regenerating principle; a barely mediocre intellect; his presumption; his great name.

How could the immense disproportion between the means and the end have failed to alarm us? The thought, the dynamics of a great State, concentrated in that dark and ambiguous nature were, to our eyes, the power consecrated to accomplishing evil, to driving, with precipitous steps, a noble Nation to scorn and ruin. It must be permissible for me, after half a century, to avail myself of History to be able to ascertain, with the indisputable wisdom of hindsight, how well-founded our predictions were.

Napoleon III had a flash of practical intelligence in allying himself with England. But, in placing the crown upon his own head, he had not blown from his soul his natural duplicity. He did not know how to show himself a sincere ally, and his clumsy deceptions so irritated the fine British diplomacy that he found it hostile in moments of supreme need. England would indeed have waged declared and open war upon him, had the Germanic victories not forestalled her.

Napoleon III did not know how to transform the war with Russia into a glorious uprising of Peoples longing to repress the tyranny of the barbarians. It was reduced to a long, bloody siege, and when Sebastopoli fell, it was because General Pelissier manfully refused, and not without pungent phrases, to submit to the orders come from Parigi.

The war of Italy! It is insisted that it was championed by him alone, forgetting the enthusiasm with which the French People subscribed to the loan issued to cover its expenses. There are two pitched battles in that war: Magenta and Solferino. The first was won almost in spite of the Emperor, by the disobedience of General Mac Mahon. In the second, the Napoleonic fibre had, as it were, a posthumous glimmer, and it was the only victory of the second Empire due to the personal merits of Napoleon III. But immediately after, his vulgarity regained the upper hand. He tore up, without warning, the pacts of the alliance; he insulted the King who had heroically fought at his side. And the substantial aim of the war, that of substituting in the Peninsula his own influence for the Austrian, was, thanks to the virile patriotism of the Italian party of action, to fail miserably. Napoleon III, even as a victor, emerged from the bloody struggle, irretrievably defeated.

The expedition in Messico, originating from unconfessable financial speculations, is an adventure worthy of a filibuster. It began with a betrayal analogous to that which cleared the way for his Oudinot to Roma, and ended like the war of Italy, with the shameful breach of solemnly assumed pacts. The fact that Massimiliano, and not the Emperor, fell victim to Mexican lead, demonstrates how little human, or divine, Justice governs the things of the world.

In the secret negotiations that preceded and followed the defeat of Denmark and the resounding victories of Prussia over Austria, Napoleon, playing a double game, simultaneously offering his alliance to one and the other contending party, aimed to obtain a gratuity from the victor; to claim for France the line of the Rhine. But he was deluded and mocked and covered with ridicule by the sagacity of Bismarck.

What is to be said of the Franco-Prussian war, which he wanted, which he undertook without the most elementary knowledge of the enemy's forces and of his own?

I do not judge the greatness of men by their success, for I know defeats infinitely more glorious than any triumph. But for this to be so, the ruins must appear to us as if irradiated and made holy by the greatness of the thought, by the nobility of the sacrifice, by the sublimity of the purpose. The life of the third Napoleon seems to me, from this point of view, as arid as a desert.

Of course! Of course! No one could run ahead of the times and perceive in the uncertain future the positive catastrophe. But already in the spring of 1854, tangible reasons abounded which legitimised the diffidence, nay, the profound hatred of the liberals. Louis Napoleon, by trampling on the principles he had sworn to defend on pain of death, had, with his crimes, broken France and deprived her of any possibility of those democratic initiatives which are the greatest of her glories. He had shown himself most cowardly and ferocious precisely against the factions that had most contributed to drawing him from the near obscurity in which, for so long, he had lived. Gratitude weighs upon vulgar souls. He would surely have to render a stricter account of all this than those which are balanced on a page of History... History, too often venal and mendacious, like the conscience of the men who write it.

To Italian liberals, the power of that man was especially tormenting, for he had responded to their benefactions and their expectations by championing the interests of the age-old enemy of the Fatherland; he had sacrificed the flower of Italic youth to vituperate resurrected Roma; to push her back into the arms of the papacy; to prostitute her by main force to all that was most monstrous to have survived the barbarism of bygone centuries.

In the spring of 1854, the alliance of Napoleon III with the House of Savoy was already considered more than probable, imminent. And since it was known that the Empire did not want the unity of Italy and that Vittorio Emanuele II and his Ministers did not believe it possible, it was inferred that, from such a union, a territorial enlargement of Piemonte would, at most, derive. Some French prince substituted for the petty tyrants who infested Italy; but the Pope in Roma, supported by imperial arms and bound, by force of instinct and circumstance, more to the interests of the Empire than to the cause of Italian independence. History would have renewed its ancient phases; we would have on our necks, with the old masters, the new.

This order of ideas drew strength from the marriage of Napoleon III with Eugenia Montijo, Countess of Teba, a Spaniard of incomparable beauty, restless, intelligent, astute, pertinacious, Catholic not by calculation, but by deep-rooted conviction. Thanks to her influence, on the throne of France, virtually, with Napoleon III, sat the priest.

The cause of Liberty could not have resumed its fatal course, neither in France nor in Italy, so long as Napoleon III interposed himself between it and the future. Therefore it was necessary to think of suppressing him... to hasten the return of things to their natural order; to spare, with a slight sacrifice, a succession of tumults and hatreds and rivers of blood...

I meditated at length, took my notes, and wrote... And to whom could I write if not to the most serene conscience I knew, to the man who had known how to capture the heartbeats of the Fatherland and proclaim it alive and prophesy it great, when all believed it inexorably laid in its tomb?

He was then in Londra. I communicated to him in detail a plan of mine (of which I shall have occasion to speak further on), asking him for his help to carry it out; prepared to go to the very end, or to desist, according to his counsel. Felice Orsini, who at that time was still a very close friend of Mazzini, saw my letter, and it is to it that I owe my future relations with the patriot of Meldola.

But to neither that first communication of mine, nor to two successive others, did Giuseppe Mazzini reply. I remembered Pianciani and, in a fourth letter, addressed to him, I vented all my bitterness at that silence, undoubtedly deliberate, which felt to me like undeserved contempt.

The reply was not long in coming, and it was brief and terrible. "In Londra I was accused of having been the voluntary cause of the arrest of Fortunato Calvi and of the failure of the Calore attempts. The accusation came from Zurigo."

Thus Austria, powerless to strangle me, had taken revenge for my flight!... to isolate me, to annihilate me with calumny. And it was as if a veil suddenly fell from my eyes. Now I understood the conduct of my companions in Zurigo; nor did it take great penetration to interpret the secret motive for Caronti's oddities. The Austrian poison had been spread by his lips.

I replied to Pianciani without a moment's delay and, in my resentment, did not even measure the phrases that alluded to Mazzini; so ready—I observed—to lend an ear to the defamations of a man about whose honour he himself, a few months before, had expressed to me the gravest suspicions. I concluded by asking for the means to go and confront my accuser.

Pianciani sent me one hundred and fifty francs; but accompanied by the near-injunction to keep quiet and to await my vindication from time. Having pocketed the money, I embraced, with great effusion, the Zappas and turned my back on Parigi... It was a splendid morning in May 1854 when suddenly, from the heights, I saw the blue lake spread out at my feet and the damp roofs of old Zurigo glitter in the first rays of the sun.

I had myself announced to Caronti, without revealing my name, as an exile who wished to communicate an important message to him. The wait in the antechamber was long; but our colloquy was brief. He was still in his dressing gown and received me standing, his two thumbs stuck in his waistband. As soon as he knew me, he grew pale and muttered between his teeth: "What have you come here to do?" — I shall tell you in a second! — I locked the door and, stepping forward so that our breaths almost mingled, I satisfied his curiosity to the full, reinforcing my words with the demand for satisfaction. "And mark my words! I demand it and I will have it before I leave this room!"

He spied, with a furtive glance, beyond the wide-open window and tried to gain time, protesting his innocence. On the contrary, he had always had for me an unconditional esteem, an almost fraternal affection. To speak ill of anyone!? He would have preferred his tongue to fall out in shreds!

— So be it! But words are carried away by the wind, and writings remain. Attest in a bit of black on white to your unconditional esteem; give me a formal retraction. This and nothing else will satisfy me!

While I was speaking, his lips trembled. I believe he understood, from my physiognomy, that it was not a time for tergiversations. He went to the writing desk, wiped the honest sweat from his brow, and wrote. Then, without turning, he stretched out his arm and handed me the paper.

I read it and was content to say: That is fine!

Then, as if we were old friends intent on competing in kindnesses, he bent over backwards to offer me his services... in whatever part of the world, at any time. I had only to express the desire. If, then, I were headed towards Italy and deemed a short stop in Lugano opportune... he would give me a letter of introduction for Count Grillanzoni who had settled there.

Evidently he wanted to discover the ground to prepare some new mischief for me. I cut his sentences short. What I would do, I did not know; in any case, that concerned me alone. Turning the key, I went out.

In the corridor, I felt a hand placed on my shoulder. And a voice whispered in my ear: "How goes it, Moretto?"

It was Angelo Fumagalli, pale and smiling. He placed a finger across his lips and added: "Come to the stable. We will speak at our ease!" He took me by the right hand and, with gentle violence, dragged me along as if I were a child. "I know everything, I heard everything! I saw you cross the garden and recognised you at once. I said to myself: There is news here. What news? I had some ugly suspicions and... why hide it from you? I committed a nasty little act, I put my ear to the door. But it is better this way! There will be no more misunderstandings. Do you know that that carrion even accused you of having stolen a watch from his coachman? That one I never believed. As for the rest... you must forgive us. What would you have? We fell into the trap like a pack of imbeciles. And you had a narrow escape, you know? Do you remember that plan for a nocturnal trip on the lake? It had been plotted to stun you with a blow of a club on the head and to throw you, hands and feet tied, as food for the fishes! Caronti would have denounced you all and, at a single stroke, rid Austria of a whole hornets' nest. The Satan! Fortunately, Grioli had sense for all of us and saved you. Bless him! We thought we were avenging the Fatherland!"

He embraced me and sobbed. Then, precisely as the other had done, but with a different aim: "And now what do you intend to do?"

— My dear fellow, I have attempted everything that depended on me to do my duty, and I have seen myself suspected by the very ones who ought to have defended me. Only one path remains for me: to persist, to answer the accusations with silence and with action.

I left Zurigo with the intention of repairing to Piemonte and made my stop in Lugano and my visit to Count Grillanzoni. He received me coldly... I understood and handed him Caronti's retraction. Then he, in turn, showed me a letter received a few days before. In it, the same gentleman exhorted him to do everything to prevent my return. My irascible character, he said, was the cause of continuous vexations and scandals which, for the good name of our emigration and in the interest of the cause "that is so dear to our hearts," it was imperative to avoid.

I gave up on Piemonte and returned immediately to Zurigo. In the meantime, Angelo Fumagalli had, in a resentful manner, taken his leave of Caronti. From him I learned that Felice Orsini had made inquiries to know my address.

A few days later I was engaged in the Maloggia attempt.

(1) This Orioli was the brother of the canon martyred at Mantova. When, after the Risorgimento, Franz Joseph went to Venezia, a Regiment was assigned as his honour guard. Orioli, who belonged to it, had his soul revolted by the bonds of blood and preferred to be subjected to a Disciplinary Council rather than render homage to the hangman of our Fatherland. And there were those who, for that act of noble pride, called him an imbecile