I DO NOT intend to narrate the detailed history of a siege that was protracted beyond all expectation. With his primitive plan, General Oudinot aimed to take possession of the Gianicolo by direct assault. Except that the fierce, unexpected resistance offered by casa Giacometti and above all that of the Vascello, which was transformed into a heap of ruins, but which French arms did not succeed in conquering, had forced Oudinot to change that first design of his. He circumvented the difficulty by extending his trenches towards the south and preparing a flank attack. This prolonged the agony of the Republic by a month.

During that month I had, between one rifle shot and the next, more than one occasion to listen to the inspired words of Ugo Bassi and to engage in impassioned conversations with Ciceruacchio. Poor martyrs of a cause more than holy, they sometimes return to enliven my solitude and in those moments I hear their voices still and dare not blink for fear that reality will impose itself and the vision will disappear. Precisely like a son who, having had the casket containing his father's body uncovered after long years and finding it intact, fears that a slight breath might disturb the dear features and reduce them to a shapeless handful of ash.

Among my memories of that time, I also count the sad and ineffable smile of Anita Garibaldi who, about to give life to the hero's son, found the strength to share in our labors and to welcome, in her frail breast, the sorrows of a fatherland that was not even her own.

And I had the opportunity to exchange a few words with Princess Cristina Belgioioso, of whom I shall speak briefly. The cultured gentlewoman, who by her very elect but morbidly sensitive nature, felt deeply the passions of the time, after the abandonment of Milano by Carlo Alberto, temporarily lost all her faith in the Savoy Monarchy and threw herself, with all her characteristic impetuousness, into the republican ranks. She had rushed to the defense of Roma and revealed an intellect full of resource in the organization of the hospitals, a strenuous self-denial in the care of the wounded. And there her hand was sanctified by the touch of a great dying man: Goffredo Mameli.

I will also say incidentally that, after the fall of Roma, the Belgioioso undertook a journey to the Orient. But the slaughter of so many heroes must necessarily have raised her noble indignation against the man who, by his betrayal, had provoked it. She drafted and published, in language lofty, but scathing, her bill of accusation, in which she alluded, all too clearly, to the dealings that had passed between the liberals and the prisoner of Ham; dealings she promised to document.

Before she could or decided to do so, she was struck repeatedly by the knife of a Bergamasque, her servant. And there were those who glimpsed, in that attempted assassination, the influence of Luigi Napoleone. It is true that the servant himself nourished a strong resentment against the Princess who had dismissed him; but it was observed that the agent of a powerful man would certainly not have exposed himself by personally committing the execrable crime. To incite the servant's hatred and urge him to strike was a less compromising and more certain enterprise.

The Bergamasque, though already imprisoned, managed to escape punishment by flight and nothing more was heard of him. A most difficult thing, not to say impossible, without the help of powerful allies. Nor should it be unmentioned that some of the princess's publications became mysteriously unobtainable.

I hasten to the end. The French take possession, in the dead of night and almost by surprise, of the papal walls... our defense is reduced to the inner line of the old Aurelian walls, where stands that villa Spada which will soon see Luciano Manara fall, gasping for breath. The Genovese Medici, half-buried amid the ruins of the Vascello, still triumphs over the numbers and arrogance of the foreigner; Giuseppe Garibaldi has moved his headquarters to the high villa Savonarelli, not far from the Porta San Pancrazio. The villa collapses under the blows of the artillery posted at villa Corsini; but from it he can dominate the field of battle... The night of Saint Peter arrived.

Despite the hardships and the fate that now loomed with terrible imminence, Michelangelo's dome was illuminated as if by day. The Florentines, besieged by the army of Charles V, had, three centuries before, illuminated that of Santa Maria del Fiore... History was linking the new heroism to the old. Towards midnight, lightning flashes, thunder roars, hail pelts down, water runs in torrents through the streets and, as soon as the fury of the elements abated its rage, the French fury was unleashed upon the city.

"Courage, it is the final test!" We rush to the defense soaked to the bone, firing when the lightning flashed. Darkness, confusion, curses, death-rattles... Amid that chaos,

Amid that chaos, I stumble and fall flat on my face.

Before I could get completely to my feet, I was enclosed in a circle bristling with bayonets, and it was fortunate for me that the order to grant no quarter did not serve to blunt French generosity.

Taken prisoner, I am led back, from trench to trench, as far as San Paolo. I am in a courtyard, among a crowd of fellow soldiers... some lie there, staring wide-eyed; others pace, like wild beasts behind bars... here and there bandaged arms, faces streaming with blood.

The thunder still rumbles in the distance; a few steps away the rifle shots and the cannon; the air saturated with electricity and with rage... my nerves transmit the impulse to my brain and my heart. It was an instant!... in the wide-open doorway the sentinel stood silhouetted in black. He fell under my dagger like an empty sack, without a groan, and I flee across the countryside, I flatten myself, I crawl, I leap; I pass, unobserved, the trenches one by one. From the last I glimpse the breach and already flatter myself that I can hurl myself, one more time, into the thick of the fray, when a flash of lightning reveals my red shirt. I am seized again, brought back to San Paolo, and there I find the Judas who denounces me as the killer of the sentinel. At daybreak, I was brought before a Council of war.

I have many times reproached myself and still do for having retained in my memory many incidents of my life that have no importance whatsoever and for having forgotten the name of the French officer who aided me in such a predicament.

He spoke for over half an hour. By what strange procedural quirk I was led from the hall, I do not know. Yet from the adjoining room, I heard the most impetuous points of the defense.

On the whole he maintained the thesis that, as I had not yet given my word, I was to be considered a legitimate combatant, with the full right and duty to kill. And, pressing on, he said to my judges:

"Does not the honorable uniform that you wear impose upon you the duty to silence all resentment and to welcome in your breast, as in a temple, sentiments of humanity and justice? The prisoner has shed blood. But what thought, that was not one of cowardice, could have stayed his arm? Was the cannon not thundering all around? Was he not fighting for a cause that even his enemies must recognize as high and legitimate? Was he not imperiling his life for the defense of his Fatherland and of Liberty?"

And he exhorted them to hypothetically reverse the roles: "Suppose Parigi were besieged by Roman arms; suppose that the beardless youth who awaits your sentence were of French blood and had killed, in identical circumstances, an enemy sentinel in order to rush to the final defense of our adored France... which of you would not admire his ardor and audacity? Who would not feel proud to have him as a fellow citizen? Who would not have wished to be able to imitate him? Who would refuse to embrace him with fraternal ardor and to honor him as an authentic hero?"

I was acquitted and on July 1st, with three hundred other prisoners of every uniform, sent to Civitavecchia. Having come within about twenty miles of Roma, I slowed my pace... no one paid me any mind and I took advantage of it to take shelter behind a bush, ready and willing to justify my halt with all too evident proof. A few minutes later I am joined by another Garibaldian, a Venetian fisherman, who for his part prepares to furnish the proof... Soldiers and prisoners continue to march, they are far off... they disappear. Here we are, free once more, and we congratulate each other, shaking one another's hand with great effusion.

We climb over hedges, we cross barren fields and pastures; for the rest of the day, we take shelter in the hovel of a shepherd who restores us with black bread and cheese. Late in the night, we take up the road to Roma again. But we found it occupied by the French. Garibaldi had departed the previous night, from the porta San Giovanni, with the core of his men, to rush to the defense of Venezia... the last strip of Italy where the People, starved and bleeding, still stood erect and united around the banner of emancipation!...

The supposed procurator of the good Lord, who had left the eternal city disguised as a countess's footman, was already preparing to re-enter it, from Gaeta, with theatrical pomp. Once the traces of the titanic struggle were erased, he would find "his" Roma, superb with a magnificence wrought by the centuries... so much so that, having propped up his twofold throne again, he would splendidly dissemble his own ignominy there.

And there were those who, in the imminence of the catastrophe, suggested leaving not one stone upon another of so many marvels. With perhaps less practical intentions, twenty years later, the Paris Commune was seized by a similar fever of desperation. But Giuseppe Mazzini held the manifestations of genius to be sacred, and his authority prevailed.

To the calm eloquence of the Master, I had attempted, in my youthful presumption, to oppose the impetuous torrent of very different sentiments. "Genius, in Italy, is sown in the streets and requires nothing else to flourish but a propitious occasion. Such an occasion would be offered by Liberty! The very hands calloused from tearing down temples would have rebuilt them just as splendidly, dedicating them no longer to falsehood, but to Truth. It was necessary to educate in the school of facts the multitude of bigots, incapable of understanding the arduous abstractions of philosophy. Let the idols it considers endowed with supernatural virtues be shattered in the public square. When, contrary to its expectation, it sees the Sun continue its circuit from East to West; when it is forced to be persuaded that the legion of angels does not descend from heaven to stay the arm of the supposed sacrilegists, it must also be persuaded that the demolishing hammer has shattered nothing but wood and marble. Let the hydra return and find the horrid ruin that befits it. Catholicism, having survived so much light of science, is by now void of any regenerating idea and, to hold itself up, needs outward magnificence. The gaze of the common folk stops at the surface, and its grandiose semblance is enough to make it venerable to them. Eliminate the gilding... show the woodworm... reveal the void! Roma must belong to the Italians, or disappear from the world's stage. Her ruins would attest to the nations the desperation of a people that truly wills; they would be a more glorious monument than any basilica."

A line of thinking that might seem inspired by barbaric impetuousness; but which I then believed did not lack for grandeur.

I attempted to reach Garibaldi on the road to Venezia; but the stratagems that deluded the three armies pursuing him misled me as well, and near Tivoli I nearly fell into the fraternal arms of the soldiers of Spain. I too ended by taking refuge in San Marino where, at brief intervals, with uncertain and gloomy outlines, the horrible stories reached me of the legionaries, disbanded, scattered, shot like wild wolves... Ugo Bassi shot, Ciceruacchio shot and his twelve-year-old son who was clinging to his arms. Thus, in my time, was the crime of loving one's country paid for. And amid such horror passed, sad and loving, the last groan of Anita.

It was in San Marino that I learned of the fall of the Lion of Saint Mark. With the surrender of Venezia, the first part of the great Italian epic came to an end. The blood-stained arms were put back into their hiding places; rage was suffocated in men's breasts. The picturesque peninsula continued to be the garden of Europe, and the pale races from the North continued to descend to warm themselves in its sun. But around our souls gathered an icy sadness that found a sympathetic correspondence in the honest, the wise, the strong, wherever the work of civilization, stirred throughout the wide earth by the great and generous Latin mother, was fervent