FOR several days, I strove to suppress the thoughts that tumultuously filled my head, by rekindling old acquaintances. At the same time, I was searching for a foothold that might put an end to my extremely thorny financial situation, to secure for myself work and bread for the future.

One evening, shortly before sunset, I was returning, unusually tired, almost disheartened, from my usual excursion, when, as I rounded the corner into the piazza dello Shoah, I literally bumped into Simon Bernard.

"Bravo! Bravo! I have just come from your house. Signor Orsini has written. Do you know what he has written? That he knows you from experience. That he wants a man of his complete trust. Either you, or he will call the whole thing off. What do you intend to do?"

This time I answered: "I have given my word to Felice Orsini, I will keep it."

Instead of going directly home, we circled the piazza three or four times. Orsini's letter had dissipated Simon Bernard's coldness and loosened his tongue. I learned that Felice Orsini was already gathering the threads of his plot in Paris; that the means definitively chosen for the attempt was that of bombs. That Baron Egassy di Torocfalda had conceived some of an entirely new kind, fashioned like a sea urchin, each point armed with a detonator cap, so that they would explode no matter how they were thrown. The Taylor foundry in Birmingham had cast them piece by piece, as if they were gas fixtures. The preparation destined to make them explode was fulminate of mercury. The same Baron di Torrocfalda had taught Orsini how to make it, and the latter had profited so well from the lesson that he had extricated himself from the difficulty by merely scorching a few fingers.

As we parted, Simon Bernard recommended I hold myself ready, because the order to depart could arrive any day. And from this I deduced, then and there, that the time had come to solicit the cooperation of Giuseppe Mazzini.

To have an audience with him was not as easy as it might seem; either because the Master, spied upon by all the police forces of the world, had become distrustful; or, as many would have it, because certain persons with whom he had surrounded himself endeavoured to keep him away from all those who might effectively assist him in some risky enterprise. Conversing among friends, it was said, sometimes with a smile, but more often not without some resentment, that it was more difficult to have an interview with Giuseppe Mazzini than with the Queen of England.

In those days, to tell the truth, several other individuals whom I knew to be in close contact with the Master had been circling around me, along with Massarenti. But my legitimate diffidence had induced me to play, in their presence, the part of a man who listens and does not speak.

Unexpectedly, chance seemed to favour me. I was walking in Cheapside with a certain Gori, former commander of the Zambeccari legion, when I saw before me, at a short distance, Mazzini, arm-in-arm with a stranger. I quickened my pace and caught up with him. Naturally, I could not speak of such an important subject in the presence of strangers and, after the necessary greetings, I had to limit myself to telling Mazzini that I wished to have an interview and begged him to indicate the time and place. Giuseppe Mazzini looked up at the air, as if seeking inspiration there; then, after asking for my address, said that Massarenti would be able to tell me something about it. Massarenti... the very fellow we found so repugnant!

We parted. Events precipitated and dragged me into their vortex before Mazzini made himself known. What would have happened had I been able to speak with him? Would he have dissuaded me from the enterprise or would he have brought to it the contribution of his influence and of his ardent soul? These are questions I have been asked repeatedly. Certainly, to answer them is of no import. Nevertheless, I observe: the man who wrote that certain exceptional actions, intended for the vindication of human rights, should not be judged by the standard of common morality; the man who pointed out to Gallenga the dagger that was to have killed Carlo Alberto; who had a part not well defined, but certain, in Tebaldi's attempt against Luigi Bonaparte, could not logically oppose that of Felice Orsini. And the Master knew full well where logic makes its home!

Tebaldi's attempt was in fact organised in that year, 1857. Napoleon III was frequenting the house of Countess Sommariva for reasons, it was said, better known to him than to the Countess's relations. Tebaldi and his two accomplices were to enter that house with a false key and take the Emperor's person. It seems they wanted to force his abdication. But the capture of a man so closely watched could not be accomplished without bloodshed, and in the eyes of the Master, the life of a simple policeman was worth no less than that of an Emperor. Be that as it may, Tebaldi's two accomplices were unable to keep the secret and the three were arrested. Tebaldi was exiled to Devil's Island; his two accomplices to Algeria.

The reaction stirred by the evil works of Louis Napoleon was too intense not to manifest itself in a violent and personal manner. Regicide was in the air, and Napoleon knew it so well that, as early as 1852, after the *coup d'état* and before the proclamation of the Empire, he had the Romagnoli Galli and Rossini deported to Cayenne, guilty of nothing save having fallen foul of the infamous Law of Suspects.

The attempt by that other daring Romagnolo, Giovanni Pianori, failed because Napoleon, unable to shield himself

"Under the hauberk of feeling himself pure"

secretly wore a coat of steel mail. Pianori was struck down before he could fire his second shot. He joined the ranks of the guillotined martyrs. His brother, already incensed by political hatred, felt his furies double in his breast at that tragic death. He left Italy, meditating a sensational revenge. But hardly had he touched French soil when he was arrested and deported to the hell of the tropical islands, like Galli and Redini, without a shadow of a trial.

Fierce spirits, these Pianoris! They knew no duty but the vindication of their own rights and the rights of others, and they ran to it resolutely, without concern for the Laws, which they considered a bugbear contrived by the cunning for the purpose of domination and plunder; without regard for their own lives, which they said were well spent, if spent to erase an injustice.

Giovanni Pianori, the guillotined, stands out in all his grim completeness from another tragic incident. He loved his wife desperately. Forced by the hazardous vicissitudes of his existence to leave her, he had entrusted her to the care of an intimate of his who, insinuating himself into the heart of his comely ward, proved too tender a lover to remain a faithful friend. Some zealous soul whispered the painful truth into the ear of the betrayed man who, facing a thousand perils, suddenly returned. He found it easy to wrench the improvident confession from the terrified woman. He became calm again and did not harm a hair on her head; but he imposed absolute silence, with that resolve which commands and admits no reply.

The intimate arrived. Pianori, dissembling, invited him, after a brief conversation, outside. They could discuss secret political affairs with greater freedom. Suddenly in the darkness, the intimate heard this question put to him: "What would you do to a friend to whom you entrusted your honour and all you hold most dear in the world, if he dishonoured you, if he betrayed you?"

— You have pronounced your own sentence!

And without another word, he laid him out gasping in his own blood.

A crime? I do not say it was not. I only say that iron times make men of iron, and that it is folly to expect gentle customs and sheeplike sentiments from people accustomed to the daily spectacle of virtue dangling from a gallows. And I also say that abstract ideas are fixed in practical life, incarnated in History, not by timid bleating, but by the impetuous action of such temperaments.

The next letter sent to me by Felice Orsini had been written from Paris, but its envelope bore no postmark other than that of London. Evidently a trusted third person had received it and posted it in the latter city. Orsini asked me to go to Miss Elisa Cheney, residing in Cambdentown, who would deliver to me a suitcase and a pair of "gold glasses." What was really meant by "gold glasses" I learned shortly thereafter from Simon Bernard. Probably, so as not to attract the attention of customs officers with an overly bulky parcel, Felice Orsini had brought with him on his trip to Paris only a part of the fulminate of mercury he required. He was entrusting me with transporting the remainder.

I went to Cambdentown that very evening. Miss Elisa Cheney, a woman apparently in her thirties, slender, petite, dark-haired, not beautiful in the classical sense, but very attractive, received me with exquisite kindness and a smile on her lips. The suitcase she gave me was, more precisely, one of those bags the English call a "carpet bag"... its sides of fabric, its bottom of leather. A tiger was embroidered upon its sides. The container for the fulminate of mercury was of mahogany and had all the appearance of a box for articles of clothing. It was on the mantelpiece between some trinkets and a clock. Before reaching for it, the young lady threw Orsini's letter onto the marble. She was perfectly calm; so much so that she did not lessen her persistent smile even when she had the box in her fingers. Either she was endowed with nerves of steel or she was unaware of the terrible power of the elegant device she was handing me. She stood observing me in silence while I enclosed it in the bag; then suddenly, still smiling: "Going to Paris? A good journey, and my compliments to Signor Orsini!"

When I returned home and Elisa came, with the baby in her arms, to offer me her cheek for the customary kiss, I had to make an effort to carry the suitcase with nonchalance. "Have you been shopping?" she asked me. And she stretched out her arm. But I said facetiously: "Be on your guard! The tiger is alive and might scratch you!" Then, becoming serious again: "They are papers that cannot interest you." And I locked in a wardrobe the tiger capable of tearing things apart, dissimulated by the other, quilted and innocuous one.

The next day, January 8th, 1858, Simon Bernard appeared again on my threshold. He had a grave, almost solemn expression, and I, who was by now expecting definitive communications, understood at once that a few steps around the square were most advisable. Nor had I been mistaken.

"You must leave," Bernard told me. "In fact, Orsini calculates that you will set out tomorrow morning. In that case, you would arrive in Paris tomorrow evening, between six and eight. He will be at the station... the rest will take care of itself. But in the event that you cannot leave on time, or that Orsini, due to unforeseen accidents, does not come to the appointment, take note of his address!" And he dictated it to me...

He left me with great handshakes and the pledge: "See you again, in a few days, in Paris."

That evening, upon returning, I did not give Elisa the usual kiss, as if to prepare her for the separation. While she was setting the table for supper, I sat apart, nervously tormenting my goatee. She surprised me with my eyes fixed on her and, unable to restrain herself, she threw her arms around my neck, murmuring softly in my ear: "Carlo, what is it?"

Then I stood up, stroked her hair, kissed her forehead, and said to her words which, another time, in very different circumstances, I had impressed upon her tender heart, almost as the seal of a solemn pact: "The conspirator must be solitary even in the bosom of his family. He must, at times, forget that he has a mother and wife and children. If his predestined hour arrives, he closes his ears to prayers, does not see the tears, and leaves... he leaves without confiding his secrets even to the air he breathes. Elisa... that hour has come!"

She grew pale and, at first, found not a word, uttered not a sigh. But it was like touching a certain key; it necessarily produces a certain note. She smiled sadly and, with a thread of a voice, which yet revealed the overpowering command of her spirit: "What can I say, Carlo? I know that you fight for a just cause; that you can accomplish nothing of which I should be ashamed. Go, and try to return soon, honest as you are, and more glorious!"

I knelt and covered her hands with kisses, as on the day we were betrothed.

So as not to prolong the painful hours, I had decided to leave home that very evening, if not London; I would be more diligent and serene in the morning, at embarkation. We supped in silence; we exchanged the fullness of our affections with glances, with long caresses. At a certain point I drew my watch... She understood and, rising, ran into our other little room. She returned carrying in her arms our firstborn, plump and rosy amidst the white linens.

He was sleeping and smiling... perhaps, in his dreams, at his mother's full breast. I embraced Elisa's head with effusion, whispered some advice to her... Another kiss with trembling lips... then I fled