A FEW minutes later we were at our post opposite the Opera. The light cast from the premises of a trattoria, that of Broggi, if I am not mistaken, struck me from behind; the extraordinary illumination of the theatre lit up our faces fully. The entrance of the trattoria was flanked by columns. Against one of them Orsini leaned his back; I stood upright at his right. We were amongst a great crowd, mostly stationary, awaiting the imperial procession. Opposite, just beyond the pavement, a cordon of municipal guards had lined up, their arms at their feet... beyond the rue Le Pelletier, along the sides of the little square, a dark crowd stirred... among them, at his assigned post, I saw Antonio Gomez, tall, erect, motionless as a statue; but however much I peered to the other side, I did not see Giuseppe Pieri.

And already one could hear, in the distance, the confused clamor of the multitude exalting the Emperor... a few seconds, and the voices became loud and distinct. To praise to the heavens the man who has gunned them down... a deplorable degradation of Peoples who prefer the quiet life to the arduous struggles for Liberty!

The imperial cortège arrived. Acting as its forerunner was a carriage containing several Court officials. The one in which, between well-concealed iron breastplates, Napoleon III was, as it were, hidden away, came second and was preceded and followed by half a squadron of mounted guides... the same who had so well seconded the heroic enterprise of the 2nd of December. After the drunkenness of blood and the proclamation of the Empire, they had been rechristened with the title of Lancers of the Imperial Guard.

A thing both simple and strange occurred. My gaze had run to the Emperor's carriage and was attempting to penetrate beyond the opaque veil that the cold had condensed upon the glass of the door. At that moment, a white handkerchief, which revealed the restless nervousness of the hand that clutched it, rubbed away that veil, as if a sensitive soul, having fully received my gaze and the hatred with which it was saturated, were scrutinizing the way, with a suspicious and watchful eye.

I did not see, but I felt the presence of Eugenia Moutijo and the magic power of the eternal feminine which knows how to work through breastplates; which, caressing and softening, bends strength and triumphs over it.

But to overwhelm the sentiment of pity, I soon had the intuition of the presence of a sad figure, with the nose of a vulture's beak, with extremely repulsive vibrations. And I felt—oh, believe what is true, even when it has the face of a lie!—I felt the warm smell of republican blood made to flow into the sewers of Paris; the blood of the generous, slaughtered under cover of night, their hands tied behind their backs; slaughtered like cattle. And the Roman epic, glorious in deeds and sacrifices, passed like lightning through my head... not as a pale memory drawn from the distance of time and space; but almost as a present tumult, full of tangible forms and of curses. I was seized by the fever which the dust gives upon the field of battle. "It is just, it is just that the liberty of peoples should spring from the death of him who has betrayed; it is just that this man should fall while he enjoys the triumph procured for him by his crimes! The Italian does not pay on Saturday, but he pays!"

The carriage slowed. I sought Antonio Gomez with my eye and saw him again. But overcome perhaps by a generous impatience, he could not wait. His hand, wrapped in the fatal black handkerchief, rose menacingly before the carriage reached the peristyle, and those few seconds of anticipation placed the trajectory of the bomb on a line perpendicular to Broggi's trattoria. I barely had time to throw myself to the ground and to give a tug to Orsini's overcoat so that, imitating me, he might get to safety. Orsini stood rigid as the column beside which he was, as it were, planted.

A sinister flash, accompanied by a deafening roar... then a darkness that seemed to me of hell. I rose with a start, while the air, a moment before resonant with cheers, now shuddered with shattered glass and with shrieks. "To you, to you!" Felice Orsini whispered to me, with a strangled voice. Blood was spouting from a wide wound on his forehead and his face was all smeared with it. He bent down, placed upon the pavement the terrible black handkerchief. I lunged forward, bent low,

I lunged forward, bent low, with clenched jaws, passing over the municipal guards stretched out in the convulsions of agony, or dead. The Lancers of the Imperial Guard were, at that moment, in headlong flight, abandoning to his fate the man they had sworn to defend. A few steps... I throw!... I throw!... the second flash, the second roar! The diffused light reveals to me the Emperor's carriage leaning toward the theatre, a wheel in pieces, the coachman rolling on the cobblestones, the horses on the ground, torn apart. Every lamp is extinguished and a black and frightful night envelops men and things.

I had thrown myself facedown among the dead and the barely living, anxiously awaiting the throwing of the other bombs. How long did I remain there? Ten seconds, it is said. I was prepared to die, but I would be lying if I did not say that they seemed a century to me. And a third bomb came. Who threw it? Felice Orsini said it was the Italian to whom he had delivered it, in the rue Le Pelletier, a few minutes before the attack. He was not believed and the question still awaits an explicit answer... for others, not for me who saw and knew that Italian. Be that as it may, he who threw the third bomb had a stout heart and a hand that did not tremble. It went straight to the mark and exploded right under the shattered carriage. Its detonation seemed to strike my brain... but an instant and I regained full awareness of the situation. I heard the earth rumble with the trampling of horses that were rushing in. The Lancers of the Guard burst in at a gallop and reacted against the impulse that had swept them into flight, firing point-blank at those fleeing. The small flames from their weapons flickered in the darkness and revealed to me, in flashes, the horror and the confusion. And the victims, undoubtedly numerous, of that heroism which so resembled fear, were later all attributed to the "blind and ferocious rage" of the conspirators.

From that horror, from that confusion I extracted myself, now on all fours, now in leaps, escaping, I could not say how, the horses that seemed to emerge in swarms from the night, the projectiles that whistled over my head.

Repeatedly, in my brief but tumultuous existence, my soul had been saddened by the spectacle of innocent victims sacrificed to the security and placid digestions of despotism. But this was not enough to render me obtuse to a profound sense of commiseration for those caused by our attack. Nor, to compress that sentiment, was the idea sufficient that, by an inexorable law, nothing is given to the People to obtain without grave sacrifice of tears and of blood.

Nevertheless, I must also say that the depressing effect of pity was, in large part, paralyzed by the persuasion that France, that Italy now had the way cleared to reach their glorious destiny; that Napoleon III was no more; that my own work had contributed to removing that nightmare from the world.