TWENTIETH CHAPTER


AT nine o'clock precisely, Monsieur de Collet was in my cell. He did not go into great detail, but what he related was more than sufficient to put an end to my conjectures. Influential English personages had interceded for me with his august Empress. It was, in fact, in those very days, the second birthday of the crown prince, and she, who was above all a woman and a mother, had been pleased to solemnize the auspicious event by granting a grace that would relieve a woman, a mother, of her affliction. My wife had already been advised by telegraph of my good fortune.

Monsieur de Collet, at this point, was profuse in his congratulations; then he started to leave, but returning on his steps: "It was the Empress who sent me this morning. She wished to be certain that her will would not be violated. Nevertheless, it is well to remember that much good and much severe justice can proceed from her august consort. A phrase of gratitude addressed to him could certainly do you no harm. I say this of my own initiative; but I am persuaded that I interpret the thought of Her Majesty the Empress, to whom you are, after all, indebted for your life."

What was I to answer? For a couple of hours a profound reaction had been at work in me, and my initial, strange regret for the unexpected return to the sensations of the living was already succeeded by a desperate yearning for an intense life, for freedom! Hope, violently expelled from the soul, returned in torrents, nor could any human force have resisted it. I say that if expressing feigned sentiments could contribute even a single straw to the projects, devoid of any form but doubtless in their tendency, that were already germinating in my brain, I must not hesitate to write one, ten, a hundred letters... to the Emperor, to the Pope, to— I was utterly defenseless in the hands of omnipotent enemies... any subterfuge, any lie became a legitimate art of war and of salvation. To slip from those claws, at any cost, to rise up more fiercely with hands unbound; to fight again... this was the problem!

I promised!

I was brought once more to the Palace of Justice, before that President Delangle who had instilled so much of his venom into our trial. By one of those hypocrisies dear to a society that attaches more importance to appearances than to substance, they wished me to appear free in the Tribunal, and they removed my chains. The part of the trial records that concerned me was read; subsequently, the attorney general, Oscar de Valle, asked for the ratification of the imperial letters patent which commuted my death sentence to imprisonment for life. These letters bore the date of March 12th. Why, then, was I brought to the very foot of the scaffold? Was the slowness of bureaucracy to blame, or the deliberate intention to subject me to a moral pressure that might induce me to make revelations?

I must note that the official account of the execution speaks at length of Pieri and Orsini... on my account, not a word! I think they did not wish to offend the susceptibilities of a people by implicitly admitting that chivalrous France had abolished physical torture only to replace it with that of the intellect. Once the pardon was ratified, President Delangle attempted to strike a final blow in favour of the social order, as he understood it, or pretended to understand it, by asking me if I repented "of my crime." At the protest of my lawyer, who feared some fierce reply, he did not insist and contented himself with saying to the gendarmes: "Lead him away!" The manacles were put back on me. I was taken to the Conciergerie and from there, in a cellular carriage, to la Roquette, where I was pushed into the courtyard with the other prisoners. One of them came to me at once, offering his right hand. It was Antonio Gomez.

What a look was ours, and how many thoughts we exchanged, in a few seconds, without a word! It was Gomez who broke the silence. The thoughtlessness that had provoked my arrest was a remorse to him, and he begged my pardon for it.

"Do not grieve over it," I told him. "We have all made our share of errors. But it can well be said that our souls knew no wicked impulses."

We ended by leaning against a wall, as if to expose our limbs to the Sun... a sad Sun that did not yet prelude the spring. We spoke of the two martyrs... they who had shed no blood were the ones decapitated! A sensation colder than winter crept into my breast and grew, and the words died on our lips. I was roused from my thoughts by a turnkey who, in passing, violently shook a bunch of keys.

Several days went by, made more painful by the humiliating prison regulations; made long by the feverish wait for news from my wife. I had imagined that the Police would no longer place any obstacle in the way of our correspondence, and Elisa, by delaying to give me her news, had revived my anxieties. My start was therefore a strong one when I heard it announced that my presence was required at the Chancellery.

I was led right before the superintendent, the Marchese Lassalle, who handed me a letter, causing me, with that simple act, a triple surprise. The first because, contrary to the iron discipline, it was still sealed; the second because the fine characters that appeared on the envelope were not Elisa's... they were utterly unknown to me; the third because, looking the superintendent in the face, as if to draw an explanation from him, I perceived that, despite his superficial seriousness, he, under the skin, was smiling.

I tore open the envelope and experienced a fourth surprise, before which the three preceding ones became pale and insignificant. The letter began by exhorting me to read to the end before judging. It then proceeded to announce that the writer was the Viscountess d'Hasting, a Scottish protestant, converted to the Catholic religion and become Sister Teresa of the Discalced Carmelites. She was enclosed in the convent of Montauban, near Tolosa. "I must also premise," said Sister Teresa, "that the rules of our Order require us to go at night, every two hours, to pray in the Convent church." One night, while she was praying, Christ had unexpectedly appeared to her. He, with an ineffable voice, had communicated to her that in the prisons of la Roquette there was a youth of a patrician family, courageous, with a soul nourished on good and lofty sentiments. The contact of wicked persons had diverted him from the straight path and driven him to perdition. Christ had concluded by entrusting to her the holy mission of saving the soul of that stray one, dear, despite his past transgressions, to the heavenly Father.

There followed a minute description of the life and conversion of Sister Teresa and a warm exhortation that I should imitate her; that I should return to the bosom of the true church of God.

The letter also had a postscript, in which Sister Teresa assured me she had obtained from the Archbishop of Paris the permission to enter into a fraternal correspondence with me. The Archbishop himself had then induced the prison Authorities to grant me leave to seal my replies, which would be delivered to her without being read, either by those Authorities or by anyone else.

It did not require excessive perspicacity to understand that the fine, elegant characters of the Discalced Carmelite concealed the filthy union of the Church and the Empire. To please the adulterer, the bride of Christ had taken up the foul trade of the spy.

I handed the letter to the Marchese Lassalle, observing to him ironically that if such nonsense were still possible, in the middle of the 19th century, under the Empire, in the France of the Encyclopedists, it had no hold on the souls of Italian patriots. The Marchese Lassalle shrugged his shoulders without replying; but his ill-concealed smile could not be contained and oozed from every pore of his skin.

Nevertheless, I considered that from that farce, insinuated into the fullness of the drama, I might be able to draw some advantage for my family; leaving aside also that writing would serve me as a distraction. Sister Teresa had my reply.

What did I say to her? I thanked her, first of all, for the interest she had taken in me. Christ, who has all things numbered, must certainly have informed her that I was a freethinker and that I believed not at all either in him or in his doctrines. If, however, a Divine Mercy truly existed, disposed to do something for me, let it for the moment leave my soul aside and think of the extreme needs of my earthly existence. I had a wife and a child, to whose well-being I was necessary. If Christ performed the miracle of setting me at liberty, perhaps my skepticism would be shaken and... one thing leads to another. Once free, we would speak with greater ease of my soul!

Now behold the subtlety of the servants of God! They took great care not to induce their principal to perform the miracle; but understanding that something must be conceded to me, if only to bait me with the hope of better, they secretly pulled the strings and... One day (only five or six had passed since I had written to Sister Teresa) as I was walking, meditating, a hand, amicably rough, fell upon my shoulder. It was the head turnkey, inviting me to follow him to the Chancellery. He had the mysterious air of a man leading a child to where the treat is hidden.

A few minutes later, I too had my apparition. Not imaginary, not false; but real and alive and more trembling for me than for herself. She stood erect in the shadow of the great room, like the Madonna in a Flemish painting, and, as soon as I entered, she ran towards me with the impetuousness of passion and embraced me. Elisa!... Elisa!... She was not alone. She had her child with her: no longer wrapped in white linens, as when I had left him in London; but grown a little, he was attempting in the prison his first uncertain steps. Freeing myself from Elisa's arms, I lifted him up and kissed him soundly; he darkened his round face and fixed his large eyes on his mother's face, as if to ascertain from her expression that he was in no danger. He was saying, in his mute language: "Should I cry, or should I laugh?"

The guard, seated near the door, a great key in his right hand, warned me that for our last farewell we were allowed no more than a quarter of an hour. We could—he said—speak freely in English.

Our brief colloquy was extremely agitated. She informed me that, following my advice, she had succeeded in interesting in our fate a certain Sir Walter, from her own Nottingham, who was one of the pillars of the London *Times*. The powerful newspaper had circulated a petition, signed then, through the humane influence of Sir Richard Main, by several personages influential at Court. Queen Victoria, swayed by a skillfully concealed pressure, had authorized the English ambassador in Paris to see to it that the petition was delivered personally to the Empress Eugénie.

Elisa had learned of the pardon granted to me as early as the night of the 12th. A telegram, descended through a long hierarchical order down to the chief of detectives Sanders, and from him sent up to her, announced that "not for my regard, for I deserved none, but out of pity for a young mother and an innocent child, the Empress had arranged for my life to be spared."

Elisa had alluded to the first part of the telegram smiling... smiling through her tears, an ineffable smile! For the rest, just as no letter of hers had been delivered to me, so none of mine had reached her hands.

I looked at her and thought: What will the poor thing do, bound by the Laws and more so by love to a man destined, perhaps, never to see her again? I felt that I must, then and there, release her from all her obligations, and to exhort her to seek a support worthy of her seemed to me a virtue. But one does not renounce, without attempting some supreme effort, the dominion of a noble heart. I began by informing her of Sister Teresa's letter and, continuing: "They will certainly send," I said, "some nun, or some priest, to you as well. Whatever they tell you on my account, take no notice of it. If they ask you indiscreet questions, reply constantly that you know nothing. If they offer you money, accept it. If they invite you to go somewhere, never go there alone... never! In a year I will be free; I will see to finding the way to be so. If after a year I have not reached you... act as if I were dead, and I shall be! A di Rudio cannot live long in chains!"

The quarter of an hour—ah, how quickly!—had passed. We embraced and her tears began again... but I could see well that they were of pity, not of desperation. Evidently, she still placed all her trust in me and expected that I would keep, to the letter, my promise. For her greater comfort, I added: "Yes, you will see me free again... in a year!" Then I searched with my eye for my child. He was on the guard's knee and was clutching, ecstatic, between his slender fingers, the large key, as if it were a toy. The guard himself, handing him to my embrace, remarked on the bizarreness of fate that amused the little one with the key that was robbing him of his father, that was making an orphan of him!...

The door opened. On the threshold I turned to engrave the image of Elisa in my heart.

I saw her again, standing in the darkness, like the Madonna in a Flemish painting. The child yearned for her kisses and pulled at her dress. A second and my apparition had vanished!...