HOWEVER vast were my desires, for the moment I could do nothing other than seek a way to establish myself decently in London. Soon the arts of Bernard put me in such a position that, far from fighting the enemies of Italian integrity, I had urgently to provide for the defense of my own personal integrity.

The calumnies of which I had, from Rossi, the first inkling, were immediately reconfirmed to me, with a greater fullness of particulars, by various other people. Doctor Bernard not only insisted, in private, on the assertions launched when he believed me already laid beneath the earth; but he attempted to corroborate them by maintaining that I had regained my liberty, not through a premeditated and boldly accomplished escape, but because the French Authorities, as compensation for my denunciations, had, so to speak, thrown open the doors of the penal colony for me.

Elisa informed me, furthermore, that the gentlemen of the Times and others, the same who initiated the petition for my pardon, had crowned their work by collecting, in her favour, a small sum of one thousand one hundred pounds sterling. From such generosity and from the sort of allowance fixed for her, on the eve of my departure for Paris, she had drawn no relief whatsoever. During my long absence, Bernard had delivered to her a single, solitary pound sterling.

To whom to attribute the blame? Was I to believe Bernard's conduct, in my regard, inspired by the terror of a wicked man? Did he slander me because he found himself unable to defend himself honestly? To what did his cowardly manoeuvres tend?

I wrote, on this matter, to several conspirators of the English Committee; but no one deigned to answer me... whether Bernard had prejudiced them against me; whether secret ties induced them to treat the question only in a secret forum; or whether human egoism advised them to imitate the good Pilate, of traditional memory.

I must make a half-exception for Tomaso Allsop, the man who had lent his own name to Felice Orsini. And I say half because he sent me a letter containing very courteous phrases and... a five-pound banknote; but not the least hint concerning the pressing questions I had put to him.

Having thoroughly pondered my situation, I concluded that to insist upon the question of the one thousand one hundred pounds could make it seem my agitation was intended to satisfy venal instincts. I therefore decided not to raise it again and to fight Bernard openly, solely on the other question. As judge, between my assertions and his, I would call upon the English public.

Rossi, who did not cease to take an interest in my fate, introduced me to a certain Kinaer, a journalist already reduced to extremes by tuberculosis; but, intellectually, still full of vigour. He, with the guidance of my information, succinctly wrote the history of the Orsini trial and that of my escape. A German publisher undertook to send a printed copy of it to the most popular English newspapers. This groundwork having been laid, I undertook, with Kinaer, a tour of lectures, commencing in Nottingham, my wife's city, and travelling in turn through Derby, Birmingham, Manchester, Lee and other manufacturing centres. Kinaer attended, very deftly, to the financial part of the enterprise. I had reserved for myself the task of expounding, to the audience, the story of my affairs and of answering the questions that, once my speech was concluded, might be put to me.

I never failed to point out that I had decided to speak in public, not to make money, but to provoke a discussion from which I had nothing to fear. And I challenged my accusers to come forward, to set against my defense their alleged documents and their arguments.

Did this ever happen? A certain Sherman, who had attended one of my lectures, spoke of it to a Club of Freethinkers, to which he belonged, observing how contrary it was to the innate sense of justice of the English people, to witness the spectacle of a man struggling under the weight of an infamous accusation and not lend him a strong hand so that he might find himself face to face with his detractors.

The "Reasoner," that club's organ, then directed by Hollyoak, reproduced that concept in one of its issues which came to my notice in Birmingham. Immediately, I wrote to Hollyoak declaring myself most willing to submit to the judgment of whatever Committee he might be pleased to appoint. At the same time, I expressed to him the desire that, as part of the Committee itself, should be included Giuseppe Mazzini, who, knowing in depth the behind-the-scenes workings of our revolutionary attempts and, a little also of my public life, would have greatly facilitated the rendering of a dispassionate and impartial verdict.

Three events, in rapid succession, led me to consider the matter fully concluded, despite the well-known proverb: "Slander, slander, slander etc."

Among the convicts whom I had known on the isola Reale del Saluto, there was a certain Le Roux, a Frenchman who, shortly after my escape, was transported to the penitentiary of Corù. From this latter location, he had succeeded in escaping and taking refuge in England. Having learned of the rumours that were circulating about me, he, spontaneously, had set about refuting them, affirming that he was an eyewitness to my "Coup d'État," as he called it. Narrating its particulars, he added to them those of the aftermath that it had on the life and on the rigours of the penal colony.

Now, however absurd it may seem, the faith that the words of an Italian patriot had not obtained was lent to those of a French convict. It is a trifle humiliating; but I shall not complain of it... the strangeness redounded to my advantage and to that of the truth. Thus fell the little story "of the thrown-open doors."

The second incident originated with Giuseppe Mazzini. The editor of the "Reasoner," having conferred with him, wrote to me and printed that a jury of honour was superfluous. A dispassionate examination of the circumstances and the attestations of the Maestro had indisputably made my innocence clear.

The third was, unexpectedly, provoked by Simon Bernard himself. "He who is born of a hen must needs scratch." The funds entrusted to his care by a certain secret society disappeared in a manner reputed to be not at all mysterious. He was abandoned by his own supporters, went mad and, "si vera sunt exposita," died in an asylum. This reticence is made necessary by the fact that I never took the trouble to verify, personally, the death certificate that concerns him...

Let us restore ourselves with the spectacle of quite another conspirator. During the peregrinations to which I have alluded, I made the personal acquaintance of Baron Egassy di Torocfalda, the inventor of the Orsini bombs, the technician of our conspiracy. If the martyr, in his trial, attributed the original idea to himself, the reason is to be sought in his honest circumspection. I have already observed that he never named any person not already compromised.

Baron Egassy was a native of the Carpathian mountains and had been a lieutenant colonel in the Austrian artillery. A great liberal and a man of action, but rough, militaristic to the extreme, he hated all those who claimed to vindicate their rights by shouting in the public squares, or to stir up revolutions by preaching philosophical postulates. His muscular strength surpassed the limits of the believable.

He maintained that the best way to be rid of a despot is to approach him, with some plausible pretext; to place, with lightning speed, one hand on his shoulder, the other on his head, and to break his vertebrae with one sharp blow. Unfortunately, it is very difficult to revive Brutus and to endow him, to boot, with the muscles of an Egassy di Torocfalda.

He possessed, among his other gifts, that of being a chemist of note. Not only did he teach Felice Orsini how to manufacture fulminate of mercury, but he had also invented a mixture which, upon exploding, would asphyxiate all who were within a circuit of five hundred feet in diameter. I think it was something like modern lyddite. He would not reveal its secret to Governments, because they would have used it — he said — to perpetuate the oppression of Peoples.

One day, stigmatizing, with phrases full of anger, the sheep-like behaviour of those politicasters who so trouble themselves to vindicate the right of "free speech," while showing themselves deaf and mute and blind to the far more vital question of freedom of action, he ended by promising me that, sooner or later, he would confide to me the formula for his explosive.

Pronounced in a moment of expansive nervousness, I did not attribute great weight to that promise. A few days later, we parted, and I thought no more of it. To my surprise, in 1862 I received a letter from him. He begged me to hasten without delay to the Hospital of Birmingham. He was there in a grave state and wished to keep his promise, to confide "the secret" to me. I left on the first train; but having barely entered the sorrowful hospice, my haste was unexpectedly cut short by a nurse. "The Baron di Torocfalda? He died this morning."

I wished to see him. His floridness, his portentous strength, more than extinguished and destroyed by the onset of a mighty illness, seemed to have evaporated... the yellowish skin adhered to the bones, as if it had been glued there. I intuited, observing him, the slow work of starvation; although the doctors, taking the final collapse as a pretext, had attributed it to a wholly different cause, distinguished by some name taken from the Greek which I do not recall.

And yet that man possessed the secret of a formula that could have returned him to his former wealth. To follow the current, to confide... who could have blamed him? For centuries, every great invention is turned, principally, to profit and to servitude. Progress, an exclusive property of the few; science, a prostitute, like religion, like human Justice. It seems fated!... But not with impunity did the poor baron enclose in his heart a spark of greatness!

He had preferred to die of indigence among the indigent; forgotten, without glory... if glory consists in the applause of men!

To tear myself away from that corpse, already nearly in dissolution, I had to make an effort. He had his eyes wide open, as if he had died with the fixed thought of my arrival and were still awaiting me. I wished to close them and felt a sense of horror... It seemed to me that, in lowering the thin veil of his eyelids, I had given the final touches to the work of death; had pushed that exceptional man, with my own fingers, into eternity