THE following day, at La Roquette. They made us wear the grey uniform of the prisoners; they put us in straitjackets... not from a lust for torture, but to prevent suicide attempts.

We had been transported to the new prison separately and locked up separately; but our cells were situated in such a way that we could see and speak to one another. A rectangular room, rather large, bare... four white walls, four windows, four doors. Whoever enters from the one that communicates with the courtyard sees, opposite, the door and window of Felice Orsini's cell; Pieri's cell was beyond the left wall; beyond the right wall, mine.

This constituted, for us, a great advantage over the Conciergerie; death was in prospect, but it was preceded by some relief.

Another circumstance contributed to making the sad present hour more bearable for me. My guards had followed me to La Roquette. They would sleep in turns to keep me under continuous surveillance; but this did not vex me at all, for I had no intention whatsoever of anticipating my end by committing suicide.

The very day of our transfer, our lawyers came to advise us to appeal. No concrete result was hoped for; nevertheless, both Pieri and I consented without raising any objection. But Orsini would hear nothing of it. He affirmed that death would now relieve him of a great weight and that it would be all the more welcome the sooner it came. Giulio Favre, to obtain his consent, had to almost force his hand.

The days of agony began and passed quickly. Because of a state of mind that is all too understandable, the memories of those days flash through my mind in fits and starts, standing out like unconnected drawings against the gloomy background of the hours in which, meditating, I prepared myself to die.

The chaplain of La Roquette, monsieur Hughon, paid us a visit at least every twenty-four hours. He was a former captain of dragoons and retained their colours; gruff and strong, despite his age; liberal, despite his position. From his very first appearance I told him, in an explicit manner, that he would always be welcome on one condition: that he never speak to me of religious subjects. He promised and kept his word.

Giuseppe Pieri, on the other hand, readily granted him the right to exercise his work, but not to undergo it passively. From the very first evening he provoked him to discussion with an open air of defiance and allowed himself to be carried away, in the following days, by a destructive spirit, by an *ad hominem* line of reasoning that was extremely acrid and almost offensive. Forced by the pitiful circumstances, the ex-captain had to put a brave face on more than one lance-thrust to his very ribs.

Pieri's voice was, for that matter, the predominant note in that narrow and severe environment. And how could he, already so loquacious even in the most colourless circumstances of life, have resigned himself to silence, now that strong emotions exalted him?

He spoke and stubbornly discussed everything... at times even with an abundant comic vein, especially if he happened to be refuting the tirades of our judges. But turn and turn about, he would return by preference to his political and philosophical ideas; as if a chasm were inexorably dragging everything into the small spout of that funnel.

A strange contrast with the demeanour of our chief, from whose cell there emerged, for hours on end, not the slightest sign of life; so much so that several times I had wondered if it were not the tomb of Felice Orsini; if Felice Orsini had not become the tomb of his own soul.

For one hour a day, we were permitted to walk in the great courtyard; but not at the same time. Pieri was taken for his breath of air, alone; upon his return, Orsini and I would go out together. We wore our straitjackets even while walking and we were watched, more than at sight, at musket-point.

In that brief hour, Orsini would expand his lungs like a man reborn; but the gaze he turned to the blue sky was full of melancholy. He walked swiftly and I, raised with military discipline, followed him, instinctively a little apart. This is what would happen: If I was in a bad mood and did not speak, he would turn his head and question me with his gaze as if to say: "A storm brewing?" But if I spoke, he would press on as though absorbed in the vision of other worlds or, if he did reply, his were words drawn from the depths, with a corkscrew.

Those brief words were enough to reveal to me the man who was undergoing a rapid and radical transformation.

Felice Orsini had brought two resentments with him to prison; one against Pieri and the other against Giuseppe Mazzini. It is well known that in his "Memoirs" the impetuous Romagnol portrayed Mazzini as a modern Mohammed who presumed to model the destinies of Europe on the whims of his odalisques—a circumstance which the monarchist Cavour used to marvellous effect. He distributed those Memoirs in thousands of copies, thus astutely building a bridge that offered the opportunity to cross the Rubicon, to furl the banner with the motto "Dio e Popolo" for too, too many Mazzinians, either hesitant for weakness of fibre, or anxious to legitimize, with any pretext, their base and venal calculations.

But the old resentment against the Master vanished the day the guards and Giulio Favre informed Orsini of the noble defence of him made by the "Prophet" on the morrow of the attack, when other patriots, meticulous about the means of redeeming the Fatherland, had almost stigmatized him as a common assassin.

To this transformation, which I might call regenerative, another, vaster and of a completely different kind, corresponded. Better to face the subject at once. Felice Orsini was the only one of the three morituri who listened, more than passively, with a compliant ear, to the exhortations of the dragoon-chaplain. And our daily walks instilled in me the presentiment of what later occurred. The convictions slowly acquired in his embattled existence were, in the man, disintegrating and allowing the substrata saturated with fables absorbed in ignorant childhood to reappear, nay, to predominate. In the imminence of his end, he returned to those religious practices to which only the blind multitude ought still to attribute essential virtues.

He therefore deceives himself and lies, unconsciously, to the truth, who, admiring the stoic fortitude with which Orsini mounted the scaffold, sought to make of him a model of coherence to be contrasted with the figure of Silvio Pellico and others, softened, almost, by their sufferings. But he would be equally mistaken who presumed to protect his greatness by glossing over his conversion. Silence attenuates nothing and cancels nothing.

It may well be said in his defence, that he succumbed to a cause that was anything but ignoble. Capable of leonine daring under a fleeting impulse, he could do nothing, thanks to his superlatively sensitive nature, against a tormenting, insistent, obstinate, fixed thought... not that of the death which hung over him; but the other deriving from the consciousness of his own responsibility in the ruin of high ideals; from the vision of the tragic death of others. His hair had rapidly turned white from it, and more than one tenuous fibre of his brain must have been shaken and almost scored by it.

Felice Orsini never posed, for that matter, before his contemporaries, as a discoverer of philosophical and moral truths. A patriot he called himself, instead, and was from his first youth; a patriot he was and proclaimed himself to be until his head was under the blade of the guillotine. He had promised Italy all his energy and to the very last drop of his blood. Italy has had greater sons, but none more unconditionally faithful. I say that there is no need to glean in other fields to constitute the glory of Felice Orsini!

Besides the dragoon-chaplain, a very powerful personage made his appearance almost daily at La Roquette: the Prefect of Police, Pietri. He treated us in a very affable manner; nor did he ever fail to endeavour to insinuate into our souls some ray of hope... now affirming that the Court of Appeal would, in all probability, annul our trial; now assuring us that the Empress and a strong party at Court were showing themselves so openly disposed to clemency that Napoleon's spirit would end up being influenced and won over by it.

But neither his manners, nor his intelligent features, could dissipate the instinctive diffidence, or bridge the abyss that separates the conspirator from a man who must, by the force of things, hunt him down and draw his own satisfaction from his ruin. This diffidence was strengthened in me by other circumstances. On several occasions, I had sent most impassioned letters to Elisa. When I wanted to write, the guard on duty would more or less free my right hand; then, having bound it again, he would take the letter to the prison Director to affix his *nihil obstat*. But my warm invocations received no answer... absolute silence, as if Elisa had completely abandoned me, or were dead. It is easy to imagine my tortures. Then, suddenly, the suspicion entered my heart that it was a matter of a refined cruelty on the part of the Police, for ends which I could not well comprehend, but whose existence I intuited. From that moment my tortures ceased... only to give way to a dull rancour against those who had procured them for me.

Moreover, Pietri had the fault of bringing to the prison, almost constantly, now this personage, now that. A morbid curiosity seemed to drive the upper classes to verify, what do I know, perhaps whether they were truly composed of flesh and bone, those who had dared to provoke such turmoil. To me, that being put on display, like a beast in a cage, was a terrible burden.

One day I found myself in the cell, with Pietri, a high-ranking military man who had his head bandaged. I do not well recall if it was General Macan or General Roguet. Pietri presented him to me simply as "one of your victims"; which made my ill humour erupt. I retorted harshly that I had sought to strike none but the man who was the ruin of my Country. And as for being a victim, I would have gladly changed places with that wounded man.

At this the military man came forward and, offering me his right hand, affirmed that he harboured not the slightest rancour, neither toward me, nor others. And I shook that hand, as best I was able, but did not reply and, turning to the Prefect, I asked him what interest the Police could have in intercepting my wife's letters.

He seemed to be surprised; but contented himself with a shrug of his shoulders.

The following day he returned alone and, before entering the cell, stood for a few seconds, upright on the threshold, filling the doorway with his fine, tall person. It seemed to me I noticed in those features something unusual, inquisitive. He entered and, after repeating the usual phrases in a manner more affable and, I am about to say, more paternal than usual, he rubbed his brow and, lowering his voice somewhat—the guard, for that matter, had left at his appearance—he spoke to me intensely of his profound sympathy for my youth. And, pitying the sad fate that was reserved for me, a little by force of circumstances, and a little also—he said—by the supreme carelessness of my companions, he assured me he had meditated much to find a way to save me, and not me alone! I already knew how the Court did not shrink from adopting measures tempered with clemency. But I was unaware—he added—that His Majesty the Emperor was also animated by the liveliest sympathies for Italy, whose greatness he admired, whose misfortunes deeply moved him. Once set upon such a path, such a man, who could predict where he would stop? Certainly no sovereign in Europe was in a position to be able to aid the redemption of Italy as much as Napoleon. Thus if I considered things with the eye of an enlightened patriot, I would not be slow to understand that I could better serve myself and the Fatherland by helping, by allying myself, so to speak, with the man I had attempted to kill.

I believe my face expressed all my profound wonder, for Pietri paternally placed a hand on my shoulder and, lowering his voice more and more, said:

"I know I am dealing with an intelligent young man and I expect, therefore, not to be considered a boor. Between His Majesty and his high designs stand the internal enemies of the Empire. Too weak to act openly, they have secretly allied themselves with external enemies and have conspired. I have not come to propose anything dishonourable to you. The salvation, the well-being of States have their ineluctable requirements. Help the high personage, on whom the triumph of the Italian cause may depend; forewarn him against his internal enemies and I give you my word of honour that you will not be long in rejoining your young bride. By what strange aberration would you wish to leave her poor, abandoned, and alone to struggle in the world and against the world?"

Now the true reason for Elisa's supposed silence appeared to me, more than foreshadowed, evident; now my indignation had double reason to erupt. "I know nothing," I replied, "and can reveal nothing. But even if I could... you, you yourself, if I accepted your proposals, would be the first to feel horror for me. Nor from you, a Corsican, would I have expected them... Italians abhor traitors!"

My natural vivacity urged me to gesticulate and, being unable to, I trembled. But without wishing it, I had touched a sensitive chord in a heart not altogether stripped of noble sentiments.

I saw that man, accustomed to so many emotions, cover his face with his hands. A few seconds later and he was looking at my face... his eyes were red with tears. He departed, promising that he would do everything that depended on him to save our heads. If he failed in the attempt, he would resign his post.

I have no reason whatsoever to doubt the sincerity of that man; but what he really did, or attempted to do, I cannot say. This is certain: On the eleventh of March he came to La Roquette and communicated to Felice Orsini, if nothing else, his hopes. It was shortly before the hour designated for our walk. The conversation between the two was still fervent when that hour struck and the guards led me into the courtyard, alone. Upon my return, Felice Orsini, always so taciturn and almost gloomy, appeared to me suddenly transformed and I might almost say cheerful. As soon as he saw me, he said in a loud voice: "Di Rudio, be of good cheer. We will not be executed!"

This happened, I repeat, on the morning of the eleventh of March. That very evening, the Court of Cassation rejected our appeal. If Orsini's affirmation was destined to be met with reality, the events of the 12th of March would have shown it. The day passed and our expectations were disappointed. That same night of the 12th, by the light of torches, work was being done in the Place de la Roquette to erect the scaffold.

The explanation of the enigma?

I had it later from the mouth of Mathieu de la Drôme. Public opinion was exerting strong pressure in our favour. In defiance of the Police, in popular haunts a song was being sung exalting "the heroes of the 14th of January." The Empress and a strong party at Court had declared themselves for clemency. Napoleon III called their manifestations indecent; but he did not have the heart to oppose them openly. To eliminate the enemies who had fallen into his power, to cast terror among those who had escaped him... such was the secret yearning of the liberticide; but it had to be done while giving the air of having one's hand forced, almost out of scrupulous respect for the Laws, shifting the responsibility onto others.

The Council of State was assembled to decide on the greater or lesser advisability of the sovereign pardon, and the Emperor made a fleeting appearance there. "The Councillors of the Crown are free," he said, "to vote according to their own conscience; but he could not refrain from expressing a conviction of his own. In that Assembly, traitors were concealed!"

It was the dark threat. The Councillors were assembled not to second the tide of pity, but to render a service to their master. Could the dignitaries of an Empire, whose essence was graft and corruption and which, in such a vortex, would have overwhelmed the whole of France, hesitate between their lavish sinecures and the lives of a few outcasts, rendered incapable of reacting and of doing harm? And had not *raison d'état* dissimulated far greater acts of cowardice?

As if that were not enough, the Archbishop of Paris, having scented the situation, deadened the mild influence of Eugenia Montijo, placing between her and the Emperor the weighted, subtle exhortations of the Church. Never had the hatreds and interests of clericalism and the State shown themselves so akin... the conspirators smelled of Freemasonry; they had fought heart and soul to put an end to that worldly power which is the ill-concealed and supreme goal of every religious deception; they, if they could, would have renewed the struggle. It was well worth the trouble to suppress them even if, in so doing, one disowned Christ another time.

The Council of State and the clergy... Napoleon III got more than he had hoped for, and his soul, which knew how to plumb the depths of characters despite their masks, must have exulted sinisterly and perhaps, like the despot in a tragedy, exclaimed within himself: "Oh how many are the souls for sale!"