CHAPTER THIRTY-FIRST

BETWEEN the incidents of my private life, the History of my Country sends forth gusts saturated with renewed hopes and enthusiasm, with bitterness and with wrath.

My previsions regarding the fatal consequences of the alliance forged between the King of Piemonte and Napoleon III—though they had come to my mind at so great a distance from the theatre of events, and while I found myself as if excluded from the rest of humanity—coincided with those expressed by Giuseppe Mazzini. Those previsions had come true.

Having undertaken the expulsion of the Austrians from the Ticino to the Adriatic for a compensation which, offending our national sentiment, placed in his hands the keys to the western gates of Italia, Napoleon had unexpectedly halted his victorious army and concluded the infamous peace of Villafranca, which left to the enemy the Veneto, the Quadrilateral, and part of Lombardia itself.

Thus the pact of alliance was torn up in the very face of Vittorio Emanuele II, who, to add to the insult, was not granted even a *pro forma* or consultative vote in the discussion of the armistice and the peace that followed.

That change of front, that broken faith, that sudden manifestation of imperial spite were due to a full knowledge of Napoleon’s manoeuvres, in part confessed, in part all too plain in themselves. Napoleon had descended into the valley of the Po to substitute his own influence for the Austrian. An enlarged Piemonte, but weak, but defenceless against imperial arrogance; a central remnant ruled by Plon-plon and vassal to France; a Murat in Napoli; an Italia still in fragments, under the Presidency of Pio IX; the Pope protected and made an instrument of the man to whom he owed his sceptre... it was, in a more or less veiled but always substantial way, the conquest of the entire Peninsula... the saddest pages of our History revived in the middle of the nineteenth century!

The unitary patriotism of the Tuscans, and the shrewdness of Bettino Ricasoli, who was its greatest exponent, derided the sordid bargain that had made the vulgar Plon-plon son-in-law to the King; and by persuading the latter of the futility of his every attempt to deceive the Italians, they lifted this newest nightmare from the souls of the patriots.

Following the example of Toscana, Umbria, Modena, Parma, Piacenza, Bologna, and the Romagne had risen up, had dismissed their petty tyrants, not to bow down to foreign sovereigns, but to attest to their own solidarity with the rest of the Italian family. The long propaganda of Giuseppe Mazzini was bearing its fruit.

If the Empire had possessed a popular base; if the ill-suppressed apotheosis of Felice Orsini, made by his own subjects, had not stripped Luigi Napoleon of every illusion on that matter; if the general conditions of the age had permitted it, he would undoubtedly have postured as an absolute master, dictating his own will to the peoples of Italia as the supreme law, and the Gallic herds would have drunk the waters of the Po for an indefinite time... He did not have the audacity and, misjudging our popular forces, destined now to expand “with, without, or against” the high influences both foreign and domestic, and trusting moreover excessively in the devious arts of his diplomacy, he preferred to watch events, temporizing.

And he announced it clearly with the celebrated phrase: “Now we shall see what the Italians can do on their own!” Which was an admonition, was a threat; which, broken into its components and glossed in plain terms, signified: “Engaged in the absorbing cares of a war, you would slip completely from my grasp. Nor do I risk my crown for a platonic love of your beautiful sky. Free from excessive cares, at the head of an army strengthened by the prestige of victory, I shall be better able to dominate the situation. And let the Italians beware of going too far beyond the line dictated by my interests.”

As for Vittorio Emanuele II, he had to contend with an Austria thirsty for vengeance and well entrenched on Italian soil; with the bogeyman of revolution swarming in every part of the Peninsula; fearful of losing even the little he had acquired; forced to subordinate the unity of the Fatherland to the fortunes of his own dynasty (he and Cavour considered it a dream of exalted minds), he could no longer flatter himself with attempting novelties, or taking a single step, without the consent of his “magnanimous ally.”

In other words, the latter had reduced the great King to the condition of a simple vassal of the Empire, perhaps more, certainly not less, than the Pope. And we see that, precisely from the peace of Villafranca, the King's Government initiates that policy of phenomenal pliability to the caprices of the man of destiny; a policy which may seem practical, and perhaps even necessary, but formative of character, but Italian—never.

And Vittorio Emanuele II exclaimed: “*Povera Italia!*” (Poor Italy!). But in this he was, at bottom, another great intellect who was mistaken. The unitary patriotism of Tuscany not only added the true cornerstone to our national edifice; but, by forcing Napoleon III to cast off his mask, it was also to render his lamented defection a fortunate event in the annals of Italia. The sublime audacity of the Action Party, intolerant of delays, redoubled in intensity and hastened the course of History.

Two months after my arrival in London, the news spread, swift as lightning, that Giuseppe Garibaldi had landed at Marsala; then, amidst general trepidation, came the most contradictory rumours, and even one that he had been captured by the Bourbons and summarily hanged from a tree. To dispel this grim report came the announcement of the victory of Calatafimi and the rapid triumphs that followed. England remained as if dazzled by those beams of intermittent light, and so great and so intense was its enthusiasm as to almost suggest that Garibaldi’s legionaries, more than fighting the battles for the redemption of Italia, were fighting for the greatness of the English People.

Garibaldi's entry into Palermo was, unfortunately, matched by the Parliament’s sanction of the cession of Nizza and Savoia: the full price paid for a service not fully rendered. Thus, while the Revolution sacrificed the blood of heroes to add new Provinces to the resurgent Nation, to make it whole... the Savoyard Monarchy operated in reverse and severed two of its ancient Provinces.

Suddenly the superior intellect that governed the fortunes of that Monarchy, with a masterstroke, turned from devil to monk. I say that Camillo Benso di Cavour, while deprecating the arts of the revolutionaries as the ultimate misfortune for Italia, became, in his turn, a provocateur of revolutions. The Marche, having risen, is traversed again and again by his emissaries who encourage the doubtful, tie together the scattered threads, distribute arms, and redouble the daring and enthusiasm by promising the imminent intervention of the royal army. And General Cialdini, charged with realizing that promise, invades the Marche to defeat the mercenaries of the reaction. This happened on the very day that Garibaldi entered Napoli in triumph.

Naturally, for this new enterprise as well, the King’s Minister had asked for the consent of Napoleon III, to whom he demonstrated the necessity of drawing a defensive cordon around the Papal States, threatened by the red shirts. But the supreme goal was to efface, in part, the shame of the cession of Nizza, which Napoleon himself had shown a willingness to renounce. To efface that shame and to paralyze the prestige of the Action Party (which had become almost irresistible after the conquest of the Two Sicilies), whose republican tendencies he greatly feared.

A monarchist to the point of fanaticism, he could not desire the unity of Italia when to attempt it would have compromised the Monarchy; he became a unitarian when the Monarchy would have been compromised by inaction. The dynamic force of republican thought had thus, indirectly, propelled the Marche as well into the bosom of the Italian family.

On November 30 of that year, I had, from the English newspapers, the news that Giuseppe Garibaldi, a new Cincinnatus, had retired, as a private citizen, to the solitude of Caprera. With meagre troops, poorly armed, in a few months and as if in a single dash, he had conquered a Kingdom. Named its Dictator, from that height which allowed him to treat with the great King as an equal, to dictate terms, he offers him the crown of the Bourbons, that he might gird his head with it. A gesture unprecedented in History!... but not unprecedented was the bad faith with which its beneficiary repaid him. Vittorio Emanuele II postured as a man who knew how to forestall a usurpation; who recovers, by his own virtue, that which is his by right. The debt of gratitude he would think to pay later.

The glorious enterprise of the Thousand had been organized by Giuseppe Mazzini, by Rosalino Pilo, who lost his life in it, by Agostino Bertani, by Nino Bixio, and by many, many others, with those means and with those arts for which the Master was so frequently reproached as for a crime. The last in a series of misunderstood and sublime attempts, which had created an “Italian question,” which had forced the Potentates of Europe to concern themselves with it, this was the most fortunate, but not the most exuberant in daring and spirit of sacrifice. To it, the glory of triumph; to the others, that of having prepared it and made it possible. And I shall recall that Francesco Crispi, who had not yet renounced embodying, in himself, the genius of rebellion, brought his contribution to it, among other things, with a conspicuous supply... of Orsini-style bombs!

The enterprise itself gave greater scope for the various tendencies to delineate themselves. Napoleon III accentuated his Italophobic aims ever more, and Vittorio Emanuele II appeared ever more in his equivocal light: a champion of the Italian cause, he conspires with Italia's enemies; a liberator, he opposes liberty. Intent on hindering Garibaldi's triumphant advance, he did not blush to enter into negotiations with the Bourbon himself. And with the Emperor of the French, he came to an open understanding to lay, along the strait of Messina, an ambush of iron and lead, to forbid the bold legionaries of redemption the way to the Continent. Except that the English Cabinet, sounded out on the matter by Paris, replied that the Neapolitans had the right to dispose of their own destinies and imposed upon Napoleon the policy of non-intervention.

The greatness of the republican Psyche shines forth all the more from these comparisons. Let it be repeated: The monarchical entity never throws itself into the fray without an eye to its own interest and subordinates the unity of Italia to privileges which it proclaims and wishes to be intangible; the republican entity, having written its own epic in letters of blood, spontaneously sacrifices, upon the altar of the Fatherland, both itself and its serene convictions.

A true statesman, Vittorio Emanuele II was then considered by Garibaldi as an end, but foreshadowed by Dante as the Prince instructed by the powerful mind of Machiavelli. Giuseppe Mazzini, more sparing in his judgment, was content to consider him better than his Ministers.

The days of disillusionment followed swift as lightning. Cavour, overwhelmed by prodigious labours, succumbed before his time to the common fate. In England he was sincerely mourned; although, to shake his popularity, something had already leaked of those secret pacts, much detested by English liberalism, which, later in the ill-fated “September Convention,” led the first King of Italia to the renunciation of Roma and to the defence, against the Italians themselves, of the greatest among our country's enemies. The Action Party hoped instead that, with Cavour’s passing, it might be able to subtract the King from the nefarious influence of Napoleon.

The Piedmontese statesman was succeeded by a most Italian man endowed with broad views, who desired unity and independence not as an end, but as a means to ensure the political regeneration and the greatness of the People... Baron Bettino Ricasoli.

The ship of State suddenly changes course. The ban that perpetuates Giuseppe Mazzini’s exile is overturned; constitutional guarantees are respected; the extreme parties are encouraged to harmonize, to realize, with their accustomed audacity, the good of the Fatherland... a renewed current of enthusiasm, a powerful tremor, a febrile activity shakes the entire Peninsula. But when, in agreement with Garibaldi, the proud baron strives to make of the Italian collectivity not an inert mass at the mercy of its own rulers, but a formidable armed force capable of imposing upon Privilege respect for popular rights, the retrograde party, already livid with suppressed rage, takes fright and decides to put an end to it. One of those parliamentary crises that cover, under the mantle of legality, the hateful interest of a caste, unexpectedly took the reins of public affairs from his hands. And antiquated and mendacious Diplomacy, under the auspices of Urbano Rattazzi, sharpens its abuse and violence to cause the young Italia to putrefy.

Rattazzi hid himself, at first, under the skin of the just man; he posed as the continuator of his predecessor’s work... he promised, he favoured, he pushed the Action Party towards the conquest of the Trentino and the Alps. At the tactical moment, the news breaks of the seizure of arms and the arrest of the patriots. Brescia, its horrible wounds inflicted by the beast Haynau not yet healed, had to suffer the agony of those opened by Piedmontese lead. Foreign tyranny had been succeeded by domestic tyranny. And Garibaldi, in a fit of indignation, hurled his sarcasm in the faces of the ferocious ones, proposing a national subscription intended to offer a sword of honour to the Russian Popof who, in Varsavia, had broken his own so as not to bloody it in the patriotic breast of the unarmed Poles.

Nor was the measure full. The possibility of acting in the North having been cut off, Giuseppe Garibaldi gathers in Sicilia a band of volunteers, recrosses the strait and ascends Calabria, resolved to give the Fatherland its glorious capital. He had made his own the war cry launched by the patriotic population of Marsala: “*O Roma, o morte!*” (Either Rome, or death!)

“You will have death, not Roma!” is the cry from Paris. And Napoleon imposes upon Vittorio Emanuele, who accepts, the role of the modern Cain.

We come to the infamy of Aspromonte. The Garibaldian Legion and the King's soldiers having met on August 28, 1862, the leader of the Thousand responded to the assault of the Bersaglieri by ordering his men to stand their ground without firing. This should have been enough to avert the fratricide, if the men who had branded Orsini's attack as execrable had not aimed to eliminate forever from the world stage the first, the most popular among the combatants for the cause of Italia. And perhaps it is thanks to the conscience of Sergeant Cavalli of Ivrea that the truly execrable conspiracy failed. Having stepped out of the ranks and advanced three hundred paces beyond the line of fire, he, a most expert marksman, fired a shot into the air. Reprimanded, covered with insults, he took aim once more...

“*Viva l’Italia!*” cries the leader of the Thousand, and falls at the foot of a tree that a resurrected Italia ought to consider as sacred as the wood of Calvary. The lead that had wounded Garibaldi in the ankle of his right foot struck the Fatherland in the heart. Vittorio Emanuele II paid his debt of gratitude in that regal fashion... and the courtiers had one more reason to hand down his name to posterity with the title of *Galantuomo* (The Honest King).

Major De Villata, shortly thereafter, summarily shot at Fantina the legionaries who, wandering in the environs of Messina, had attempted to reach Garibaldi. And certainly more bitter than death was the insult from that modern Maramaldo, who presumed to impress upon their unstained brows the brand of the brigand. In that lust for reaction, Alfonso Lamarmora, the narrow-minded Lamarmora, the same who, in 1849, to the offers of fraternal aid from the Roman Triumvirs, had contrasted, boasting of it, the cynical response of the bombardment of Genova; the same who was to lead us to the humiliation of Custoza, arrested, despite parliamentary immunities, three Deputies, three representatives of the Nation... and wanted to have them shot. But Urbano Rattazzi, frightened by the possible consequences, paralyzed by the disdainful reprobation that, on the morrow of Aspromonte, rose like a tide in every part of the civilized world, ordered him to set them free and to make his apologies.

“The Monarchy!” exclaimed Giuseppe Mazzini in those days, “in Lombardia, inveighs against the patriots in favour of Austria; in southern Italia it shoots the patriots in favour of the Pope. The ambiguity is no longer possible!” And he detached himself, openly, from the Monarchy.

Too late! No longer the interpreter, even if only in appearance, of the popular will, Vittorio Emanuele II now felt sure of himself and boldly declared himself the sole arbiter of the destiny of the annexed Provinces. He threw, like a leaden cloak, over the rest of Italia, the pedantic administrative systems that were scarcely suited to the little Piemonte.

And, what is worse, he lavished medals and rewarded with advancements the dishonest and the deluded who were his henchmen, thus initiating that policy, continued by his successors, which, aiming almost exclusively at the aggrandizement of the army and honouring the ferocious repressions, allowed them to be renewed and, through them, to subsist. Nor are the high grandees of the Ministry ever lacking, after every foul deed, to suffocate the solitary voice of some Deputy, praising to the heavens the spirit of abnegation, the profound sense of duty with which the army shows itself to be animated... as if Italia had undergone and undergoes so many sacrifices to impose upon the flower of her youth the high ideal of acting cruelly against their famished and unarmed brothers, and of being cowardly