<!-- pages:162-165 -->

## Chapter the Tenth

A FEW minutes later we were in position opposite the Opera. The light cast by the premises of a trattoria — the Broggi, if I am not mistaken — struck me from behind; the extraordinary illumination of the theater fell full upon our faces. The entrance to the trattoria was flanked by columns. Against one of these Orsini leaned his back; I placed myself upright to his right. We were among a great many people, most of them standing still, awaiting the imperial cortège. Opposite us, just beyond the pavement, a cordon of municipal guards had drawn up in line, arms at the foot... beyond the rue Le Pelletier, along the sides of the little square, a dark crowd surged and pressed... among it, at the place assigned him, I saw Antonio Gomez, tall, erect, motionless as a statue; but though I searched as keenly as I could on the other side, I did not see Giuseppe Pieri.

And already one could hear, in the distance, the confused clamor of the multitude acclaiming the Emperor... a few seconds more, and the voices grew sonorous and distinct. To cry up to heaven the man who had mown them down with grapeshot... a deplorable degradation of Peoples who prefer a quiet life to the arduous struggles for Liberty!

The imperial cortège arrived. Its forerunner was a carriage containing several Court officers. The one in which, behind well-concealed iron cuirasses, Napoleon III sat as though in hiding, came second and was preceded and followed by half a squadron of mounted guides... the very same who had so ably seconded the heroic enterprise of the 2nd of December. After the drunkenness of blood and the proclamation of the Empire, they had been rechristened with the designation of Lancers of the Imperial Guard.

A simple and strange thing occurred. My gaze had flown to the Emperor's carriage and was attempting to penetrate beyond the opaque veil which the cold had condensed upon the glass of the door. At that moment, a white handkerchief, which betrayed the restless nervousness of the hand that clasped it, wiped away that veil, as though some sensitive soul, having fully caught my gaze and the hatred with which it was charged, were scrutinizing the street with a suspicious and watchful eye.

I did not see, but I felt the presence of Eugenia Moutijo and the magical power of the eternal feminine, which knows how to work its way through cuirasses; which, by caressing and softening, bends force and triumphs over it.

But to sweep away the sentiment of pity, I had at once the intuition of the presence of a grim figure, with a nose like a vulture's beak, and with vibrations of the most repulsive kind. And I felt — oh, let it be believed as truth, even though it wear the face of falsehood! — I felt the warm odor of republican blood made to run in the sewers of Paris; blood of generous souls, slaughtered under cover of night, their hands bound behind their backs; slaughtered like herds of cattle. And the Roman epic, glorious with deeds and sacrifices, flashed through my mind... not as a pale memory drawn from the remoteness of time and space, but almost as a present tumult, full of tangible forms and of maledictions. I was seized by the fever that gunpowder gives on the field of battle. "It is just, it is just that the liberty of nations should spring from the death of him who has betrayed; it is just that this man should fall headlong even as he savours the triumph procured for him by his crimes! The Italian does not pay on Saturday — but he does pay!"

The carriage slowed. I sought Antonio Gomez with my eye and found him again. But overcome, perhaps, by a generous impatience, he could not bring himself to wait. His hand, wrapped in the fateful black handkerchief, rose threateningly before the carriage had reached the peristyle, and those few seconds of anticipation brought the trajectory of the bomb into a line perpendicular to the trattoria of the Broggi. I had barely time to fling myself to the ground and to give a tug at Orsini's overcoat so that, following my example, he might save himself. Orsini remained rigid as the column against which he had planted himself as though rooted.

A sinister flash of light, accompanied by a deafening roar... then a darkness that seemed to me infernal. I sprang to my feet as the air, but moments before ringing with cheers, trembled with shattered glass and screams. "Your turn, your turn!" Felice Orsini whispered to me, in a strangled voice. Blood was spurting from a wide wound on his brow and his face was all besmirched with it. He bent down and laid the terrible black handkerchief upon the flagstones. I hurled myself forward, crouching low,

I hurled myself forward, crouching low, jaw clenched, passing over municipal guards stretched out in the convulsions of agony, or dead. The Lancers of the Imperial Guard were at that moment taking to headlong flight, abandoning to his fate the man they had sworn to defend. A few paces... I threw!... I threw!... the second flash, the second thunderclap! The diffused light reveals to me the Emperor's carriage lurching toward the theater, one wheel in pieces, the coachman rolling on the cobblestones, the horses down and ripped open. Every lantern is extinguished and a black and terrible night enfolds men and things alike.

I had flung myself face down among the dead and the half-living, waiting in anguished suspense for the throwing of the remaining bombs. How long did I lie there? Ten seconds, it is maintained. I was prepared to die, but I should be lying were I not to say that those seconds seemed to me a century. And a third bomb came. Who threw it? Felice Orsini said it was the Italian to whom he had handed it over, in the rue Le Pelletier, a few minutes before the attempt. He was not believed, and the question still awaits an explicit answer... for others, not for me, who saw and knew that Italian. Be that as it may, whoever threw the third bomb had a stout soul and a steady wrist. It went straight to its mark and burst directly beneath the shattered carriage. Its detonation seemed to strike my very brain... but in an instant I had recovered full possession of my senses. I heard the ground resound with the trampling of horses galloping up. The Lancers of the Guard came thundering in at the gallop and reacted against the impulse that had swept them into flight, firing point-blank upon those who fled. The flashes of their weapons leapt in the darkness and revealed to me, in fitful glimpses, the horror and confusion. And the victims — unquestionably numerous — of that heroism which bore so strong a resemblance to cowardice, were afterwards attributed one and all to the "blind and ferocious fury" of the conspirators.

From that horror, from that confusion, I extricated myself, now crawling, now in lurching bounds, escaping — I could not tell you how — the horses that seemed to pour forth in swarms from the night, and the bullets that whistled about my head.

Repeatedly, in the course of my brief but tumultuous existence, my spirit had been saddened by the spectacle of innocent victims sacrificed to the security and the placid digestions of despotism. But this was not enough to render me impervious to a deep sense of compassion for those caused by our attempt. Nor was it sufficient to suppress that sentiment, the idea that, by inexorable law, nothing is granted to the

People without grave sacrifice of tears and blood.

Nevertheless, I must also say that the depressing effect of pity was, in great part, paralyzed by the conviction that France, that Italy, had now a clear road to reach their glorious destiny; that Napoleon III was no more; that my own deed had helped to lift that nightmare from the world.
