In those very days, the frigate "Amazzone" put in at the island of the bathed and kissed, and brought us a wave of news from old Europe.

The men of retrograde ideas and the new men had continued their strenuous struggle there for the conquest of the future, and great events had followed in quick succession and fixed themselves in History, though Orsini and Pieri and I and so many, many others had been totally eliminated from the political scene a fine lesson in humility! Magenta had inscribed its name there in characters shimmering and blood-red. And I was saddened by it. Why, why, what did I perceive in it? The King of Piedmont had followed the tactic of his predecessors: to make use of the French to beat the Austrians; only to ally himself, later, with the Austrians to put a check on the French and, in either case, what were the results?... a petty aggrandizement of his Piedmont; a small increase in revenue for the old dynasty... that is what I perceived in it! Napoleon would never have consented to having at the borders of the Empire a strong Italy, capable of escaping his influence, his predominance; Napoleon, exalting the Church and made in his turn, in the hands of the Church, an instrument of reaction and oppression, would never have said to Italy: "Go, proceed triumphantly on the high road and find your Rome again!"

Vittorio Emanuele II had insinuated, between the Italian People and its Unity, that dissolving element that would put an end — I thought — to the heroic times, which regenerate character, in order to begin those of vulgar opportunism, of cowardly tergiversations... insinuated, I foresaw the profound skepticism that would invade the Latin soul, so prone to exaggerated despair; the Latin soul that does not shine without enthusiasms, as blood does not burn and does not redden without oxygen. The glorious sign, foretold by so many chosen intellects, the yearning and torture of so many virile consciences, seemed to me fatally postponed. In the best of hypotheses, between the present and that sign... an insidious wasteland, where liberty could not have taken root except rickety and bastardized by the ineluctable demands of a Monarchy. Never, so much as in that hour and with that garb of the outcasts clinging to my flesh, did I deplore not having known how to strike him.

An officer of the Amazzone, impressed by my sadness, kindly asked me the reason for it.

"If Italy," I answered him, "in order to rise, whether much or little, to liberty, had absolute need to resort to foreign arms, I should have preferred to see men descend from the Alps who did not have, like us, wrists heavy with chains. Magenta will undoubtedly mark a memorable date in the annals of Italy; whether an equally auspicious one, I do not know. I know that it would have been auspicious had Napoleon been vanquished and defeated there!... Oh, the providential misfortune! The two Peoples would extend their hands to one another without subtexts, without ulterior motives; the one after having declared the usurper fallen from the throne; the other after having freed itself, with the third defeat of the Monarchy, from the equivocation, from the nightmare that possesses and almost denatures it. Who could have resisted their impetus? They would have done far more than beat the Austrians and sweep away the petty tyrants who encumber the Peninsula; they would have practically eliminated the Alps!"

"A generous dream!" said the officer with his head lowered. Then he leaned over and murmured in my ear words that made me start: "On board, we have a Decree of amnesty... and it is for the political convicts!"

An hour of anxiety, and we were lined up in front of the barracks. The Captain of the frigate uttered a few sentences, alluding to the new glory with which the French arms "had covered themselves," and, after, the obligatory eulogies to the high wisdom and valour of the august Sovereign. Having praised his clemency to the heavens, he proceeded to the reading of the Decree of amnesty. The Director of the penitentiary pronounced one by one, with heart-breaking slowness, the names of the individuals upon whom this unexpected dew was falling. That of Galli, that of Rossini, that of Tebaldi, mine were not pronounced. The Decree concerned only French subjects!

Several officers gathered around us and, expressing their regret, insinuated that a petition from us, supported by the Director of the penitentiary, would, in all probability, be favourably received by the Emperor, who would thus remedy that oversight, which was without a doubt unintentional. Why not draw it up immediately? The Amazzone itself would carry it to France.

Galli, Rossini, and Tebaldi consented and, there and then, announced to me that they trusted more in their petition than in the escape attempt, which, naturally, they were renouncing. And this was not, from my own personal point of view, the least among the sad consequences of the Franco-Piedmontese alliance and the victory of Magenta.

To remedy that defection was a thorny task, and not for me, who did not know the guests of that sorrowful hotel sufficiently well. I entrusted the task to Cousin, the former officer of Louis Philippe. Who applied himself to it with such circumspection that he took a couple of months. On December 1st he informed me that all was ready. On the morning of the 9th, Morbioli and I watched from the pier the departure of the *Abeille*, en route for Cayenne. Its wake was still whitening the water when I, turning to the proud Trasteverino:

"Morbioli, today we resolutely play the last card. Advise the comrades, with due prudence. Who the latest additions are I do not know precisely; but I know they are not of the same stuff as those we have lost. I must, in this regard, make a recommendation that I deem important."

And I exhorted him to leave the archpriest aside. True, he had contributed to the expenses; but the load he carried in his Bible, no longer too secretly, could have aroused perverse instincts in others, if not in us. To abandon him to his fate was, in all probability, to save his skin. Besides, we were not to run the risk of dishonouring, with dishonest actions, an undertaking that our very enemies would have been careful, in their hearts, not to censure.

Morbioli rubbed his hands and observed that the archpriest would remain a caged bird, precisely because of that little treasure on which he had counted so much to be able to beat his wings. "It seems the holy unction has not infused in him a crumb of prophetic spirit." And he added: "The idea suits me; because, to tell you the truth, that priest, in such a risky attempt, felt like a bad omen to me. It was as if we had brought him along to sing the *De profundis* over us!"

I gave him a few more instructions and we separated. At five o'clock, leaving the Workshop, I saw him again, busy around the gunboats. An hour later, while the multitude of wretches sat in the refectory, before their tin plates, I stood in a solitary place, upright on the sand, with my feet in the wash, anxiously waiting; in that low place, set amongst the rocks, no one could see me who was not on the sea.

And from the sea the rowers saw me. The desire for supper added vigour to their muscles and the little boat darted lightly over the waves, as if barely lapping at them. I gave a shout and raised my fist high in the air, showing, clenched between my thumb and forefinger, a five-franc piece.

They swore; but, induced by Cousin, who was in command of the small crew, they changed course and, in a flash, the keel scraped and stopped. "Quick... Quick... how much small change!"

For all reply, a whistle, and from the rocks, five grim faces emerged, capable of commanding the respect of a pack of savages. Before the fishermen could recover from their surprise, they found them at their side, with blades raised. But the threat was an almost superfluous precaution. Questioned one by one, the rowers had, for some time now, manifested their ardent desire to flee. They feared their comrades and no one had dared to pronounce an explicit yes. The core of my undertaking consisted, therefore, in binding together in a single bundle, with a bold initiative, all the pale individual yeses; in transforming them into a strong, collective, and dynamic will.

When I had brought out the provisions and the mast and the sail from their hiding place, the hesitant ones looked each other in the face and smiled. They contented themselves with saying: "Let it be understood that we are yielding to force!"

The same thing happens in great political and social matters. How many truths are already well rooted in the heart of man, how many aspirations already sprout there vigorously! But nothing is realized until the audacious arise who dare to be the precursors. And it is this deplorable inertia, this fatal cowardice that lends so much strength to the few to tyrannize the many.

Four strokes of the oar and we are a rifle-shot away from the shore. There were eleven of us. The archpriest was missing; but he was not the only one. Morelli, the Roman tailor, who had also lent us such effective aid, seized by a sudden fever, was delirious in the hospital. Morbioli and I, the only Italians.

Now the rocks no longer block our view or that of others, and the unusual spectacle of a sailboat reveals, in an instant, the attempt so jealously concealed. The entire refectory is in an uproar and, in the confused symphony of shouts, of laughter, of curses, carried to us by the wind, the terrible command of an officer stands out: "*Aux canonnières!*" A line of men exits the refectory and stretches, with sinister undulations, toward the pier.

Our little boat was flying; but with a manoeuvre that I could not understand, Cousin, instead of keeping the bow pointed toward the Continent, described a wide circle, as if he intended to go around the island. The convicts, who on the rocks were traversing a short chord of that circle, quickly reached the pier and lowered a gunboat in time to be able to intercept our path. In other words, we were running at full speed, and almost on purpose, to collide with danger.

I watch, with anxious eyes, the gunboat that is floating, apparently marvellously; I watch, with even greater anxiety, Morbioli. He understands and says: "Trasteverino blood does not fail! See? No one is going on board because the plugs are at the bottom of the sea... now they are scurrying to get more from the workshop! And the keel, on the bottom... four mortal eyelets!" And having said this, he clenches his jaw and presses with his arms outstretched into the void, as if he were striving to make the gunboat heavier and to do violence to the sea.

Suddenly he punches the air and bursts into laughter!... The four eyelets had done their duty; the gunboat, heavy with waves, had reached the plugs there where the light of the Sun did not reach. And the blackening human swarm on the shore acclaims us with a deluge of cheers, with a feverish waving of rags and hats.

The tormented were exulting at the defeat of the tormentors!

Now Cousin completes his mysterious manoeuvre and resolutely turns the bow toward the North. I shout at him nervously: "What are you doing?"

"Be quiet! The *Abeille* will soon give us chase and it is on the coasts of Guiana that they will expect to catch us. To the north, to the north! Freedom is amidst the tempests; our safety is in danger!"

We sailed strenuously the entire night, always turned toward the Pole. Great wind, great waves! The Ocean covered us with salt spray, rumbling with a great voice in the darkness.

Was it admonishing us? Was it reclaiming us? Our senses, terribly tense, could not understand it... Now it thrust us upward as if to cast us out of its domain; now we were drawn precipitously toward the abyss, as by a powerful, irresistible suction. Our only reliance was the marble impassivity of the captain. No human voice, amidst that noisy fury, but his, measured, calm, cold, metallic...

The dawn found us soaked and shrivelled. But we had left behind the waters muddied by the great rivers poured into them from the Continent, and we were already ploughing the deep azure. The Sun and our reborn hope transformed us in a short while. The Ocean could well churn, roar its incessant threat. Any of its waves could swallow us!... what did it matter? Every flutter of the sail could bring us ever closer to a final, tragic struggle... for on every face there appeared the firm resolution to cut throats, or have one's throat cut, should the fruit of our daring be contested. What did it matter?... We felt as free as the wind that ran through the infinite