FEBRUARY 25TH arrived, the day fixed for the unfolding of the trial. I was taken to the Palace of Justice and for the first time, after the evening of the attack, I saw my companions in misfortune in full view.

The courtroom was thronged with men and ladies. There was a great show of apparel... people flocked to the trial as to the theatre. And yet, through the perception of I know not what mysterious sense, I understood at once that the multifaceted soul of that audience was not hostile to us. Hostile, instead, deliberately hostile, were the individuals seated on the bench and the band of hirelings that surrounded them. These men perhaps imagined themselves to be the Empire and its strength, and they regarded our attack as one regards a personal offence.

The trial was, in its essence, a repetition of the preliminary investigation... but revised and corrected. The right to a defence exists for the good and it exists for the wicked, and I would be a fool if I reproached the French judicial authorities for not having made an apology for the accused; but just as foolish would he show himself who, blinded by the prestige inherent in social position and with the instincts of a fetishist, were to take the opinions expressed by those authorities as the unit of measure by which to judge us.

From the first unfolding of History down to our own days, privilege has had, in order to subsist, to reinforce its tyranny with artifice. Tyranny is, by its very nature, intermittent and does not reach everywhere. Its deficiency is repaired by a discipline refined over centuries, which manifests itself in various ways, according to the times and customs, but which constantly aims to portray the leaders of a State or a religion, at least so long as they live, as paragons of genius, as paragons of sanctity; which aims, at the same time, to portray the recalcitrant who refuse to enter the orbit of those great men, of those saints, as fanatics, as degenerate and wicked creatures.

This discipline creates the phantoms devoid of substance, yet rosy and phosphorescent, which attract the multitudes onto tortuous paths; it creates the frightful spectres that repel them, with mad fears, from the straight paths. It was this that made the Grand Lama inaccessible, so that the eye that sees, analyses, and judges should not perceive, in his flesh and in his soul, the defects inseparable from human nature. It has induced the Sultans to have themselves preceded and followed by a pack of assassins brandishing their scimitars. The audacious who dared raise their inquiring eyes to the demigod provoked their own instantaneous death.

It has taught, on the other hand, that the rancour against rebellious souls must continue even after their execution. To sever the heads that would not bow is not enough; one must expose them, bleeding, to the mockery of the unthinking. To burn the thinker at the stake is not enough; one must pronounce a fierce curse over his ashes, one must cast them to the winds!

Austria would have been naive had she contented herself with hanging the Italian patriots. She buried them without funeral rites and without a coffin, in out-of-the-way pits, as was the practice with the carcasses of quadrupeds.

It is this fatal discipline, modified by the times, that labels and persecutes as a crime the honest expression of an honest thought and, where certain extremes are no longer possible, the livid war against reputation and memory is still in vogue. Which war, if it is useful to privilege that is more or less legally constituted, becomes an unavoidable necessity for the privilege that has become such through oppression and crime.

At my age, one notes facts, one does not vent resentments. In the trial concocted against the authors of the attack of January 14th, our denigration was all the more necessary inasmuch as the very origin of the Empire was, more or less openly, under discussion. We sat on the bench of the accused opposite Napoleon; but Napoleon sat on the bench of the accused opposite France and the civilized world. Every nobility of his soul, every loftiness of his purpose became an aggravating factor for us; every loftiness of our purposes tended to diminish him, was a condemnation for him.

Nor should it go unsaid that violent action sometimes gives rise to incidents which show it to be more effective than any other propaganda. To denigrate us, to make us out to be malefactors of the lowest sort, to diminish the probability of finding imitators, must therefore have been the unconfessed, but essential, aim of the trial. I recognize that, from their point of view, the French judicial authorities acted wisely in attempting to decapitate our reputation along with our bodies. I recognize, at the same time, that they plunged into the enterprise with all the grim adroitness of the servants of the Second Empire.

The indictment, formulated and read by the Imperial Prosecutor Chaix d'Est-Ange, glided deftly over the initial uncertainties and the police machinations; it portrays the investigating authorities with the poses of a genius who observes, dissects, and conquers. It suppresses, however, our every impulse that might reveal an uncommon character and, by insisting on the most easily censurable aspects, and giving emphasis to our weaknesses, it weighs us down with commentaries, often absolutely fantastical, that reek of cowardice.

The President of the Tribunal, Monsieur Delangle, for his part, laboured with viperine persistence to add the requisite embellishments to the Prosecutor's semi-literary creation, and he dissimulated its improbabilities by bringing up incidents which, even if true, would have had no kinship whatsoever with our conspiracy. Worse, he "piously" threw over the threadbare habit of disinterestedness the ample mantle of the hired assassin; he impressed the mark of the charlatan upon dying virtue.

An easy task, moreover! We have lived in times of intense passions; times in which the attractions and repulsions of souls followed one another with the violence of a storm. What man, taking in them a more or less active part, has not seen himself treated, to his own astonishment, now worse than the devil, now better than a saint; an object, often simultaneously, of profound veneration and of immeasurable spite! It is understandable that the police should have had no lack of mud to sling.

Thus upon Giuseppe Pieri, President Delangle poured, in Paris, in 1858, the hatred of the Tuscan reactionaries that had persecuted him since 1830; the hatred that, by depicting him as a beast of liberalism, had succeeded in having him dismissed as a colonel; the hatred that had taken as a pretext, to defame him, a prank among bohemians who took, at the expense of another bohemian, a watch worth a few *baiocchi*.

The generosity of spirit, the haughtiness, the indignant impulses of Felice Orsini were passed off as a "ridiculous ostentation". And when Orsini persisted in maintaining that the third bomb was not thrown by him, but by the Italian to whom he had delivered it a few minutes before the attack, Delangle demonstrated his serene impartiality in the search for truth by bursting out and portraying him as a liar who sought to make it believed that his hands were pure of the blood of the children, women, and old men wounded and killed; "because the smell of that blood rose up to him and went to his head".

To complete his praiseworthy work in favour of high and moral principles, President Delangle then received into his compliant ear the whisperings from the sacristy, and Felice Orsini—Commissioner of the Roman Republic in a distant province, who, surrounded by foreign enemies, weakened by internal enemies, maintains his phalanx with requisitions—was depicted to the jurors as a common thief, who then escaped, by flight, the delights of the pontifical life sentence.

As far as I am personally concerned, Delangle had not a shadow of a pretext to reproach me for either family relations reputed to be incorrect, or misappropriations true or apparent; but this was not to make me immune to his venom. I had revealed how and why, on the evening of January 14th, Felice Orsini had given us the sum of 200 francs. My revelation was aimed at making our Judges understand that venality was not in our souls. But I was forced to realize that I had not factored into my calculations the refined malice of my Judges. That tiny drop, in such a predicament, was enough for the most upright Magistrate, assuming an air of scornful surprise, to accuse me of having, I who belonged to an honourable family, abandoned my schooling and abhorred work to the point of degrading myself, little by little, so as to become a mercenary assassin for 200 francs!

Two words on the trial reports. The tactic of denigration could not stop at the edge of the official papers, as our fabled progenitors at the border of paradise lost. They were retouched and mutilated and distorted, like all the rest, at His Excellency's pleasure. An example: When President Delangle asked us if we wished to add anything concerning the imminent application of the sentence, Gomez and Orsini replied: "Nothing!" Pieri observed that he had not shed blood. I pointed to Kim, the municipal sweeper who, filing past with the other witnesses, had given his false testimony. And I denounced him in a loud voice, protesting that, in pronouncing the sentence, for the sake of justice, no account should be taken of a perjured deposition.

The official report affirms that, contrary to my three companions, unanimous in pronouncing the word "nothing", I invoked "the clemency of my judges".

The meeting of Francesco Crispi with Orsini? I would be lying if I said I did not deny it. But it must be remembered that Orsini himself had, a few seconds before, declared that the Italian of the third bomb was not known to his accomplices, not even to Pieri; that he had not revealed his existence to anyone; that none of us had suspected him.

Was this not suggesting to me, almost openly, my line of conduct? And was not my denial, moreover, the swiftest means of avoiding insidious interrogations and schemes that could have compromised a man who remained unsuspected and free?

If the charlatans of the Empire had not felt in their souls the terror of the truth, they would not have required the newspapers to adhere strictly, in their reports, to what was published by *Le Droit* and *La Gazzetta dei Tribunali*. Truth halved is no longer truth, and the *raison d'État* that does not scruple to adulterate it by thinning it, cannot restrain itself for scruples when it is useful to adorn it like a harlot, or to line its garment with some tendentious little lie.

Let the man who swears by the infallible sanctity of the powerful blindly believe the official reports, with that simplicity of soul which leads others to believe in the infallibility of the hypocrite in whose ear a dove might coo the truth. Infinite and multiform is human foolishness!

But the shrewd man who does not let any broth whatsoever trickle into his intellect without filtering it, will certainly not fail to reflect that we find ourselves, if for no other reason, under the unfavourable light of those who have their own history written by their own enemies, in times and under circumstances that made them believe our every refutation impossible.

The sentence was pronounced on the night of January 26th and, almost as if to heighten the theatricality of that denouement, as the Court, its deliberations concluded, re-entered the great Audience Hall, the clock of the Palace of Justice struck its chimes.

For Gomez, the galleys for life; for Pieri, for me, for Felice Orsini, the penalty that befits parricides. Louis Napoleon had become, after having cannonaded it, the father of his people—History is full of these bloody ironies! And so that no doubt should remain to us as to the nature of that penalty, its description was read out in full: "led to the scaffold, in a shirt, barefoot, with the head covered by a black veil; then the reading of the sentence, then the decapitation".

I looked into the faces of my companions in faith and misfortune. Gomez, deathly pale, maintained a marmoreal immobility—the pain of the sentence and the most natural satisfaction of having escaped the worst seemed to cancel each other out in his heart. Pieri was shaking his head and kept his eye fixed on the President, with an indefinable mixture of scorn and commiseration. I noticed that his lips were moving, and I had the impression that he was at that moment pursuing a certain phrase addressed, precisely, to Delangle, during the interrogation: "I knew very well we would never come to any good, with that stubborn man!"

Felice Orsini slowly turned his eyes from one judge to another. He seemed to say, without a shadow of bravado: "your misery does not touch me!"

As for my own state of mind... what can I say? I had long foreseen the sentence; now that the prevision had come true, I struggled to be fully conscious of it, to grasp its full import. It was to assure myself that I was wide awake that I had looked into the faces of my companions. Suddenly the image of Elisa arose vividly in my mind, not blooming and smiling, but as I had kissed her for the last time, slumped on the chair, her eyes lifeless, deprived of her senses, as if the tribunal of the Seine had pronounced her sentence, not mine.

That image remained so fixed in my brain as to not permit me to see, or to think of, anything else. Traversing the underground passage that led us back to the Conciergerie, I roused myself and, turning to Orsini, who was following a few steps behind me, I said to him: "You who have means, remember them!" He understood and murmured, "I promise you!" The prison door had barely closed behind me when I felt a strange sensation, as if I had been plunged into an almost familiar quiet. Saturn and the other guard already knew everything... they had lost the wager, they had prepared the champagne. But they wanted the opportunity for a rematch. If the sentence was not overturned by the Supreme Court, or by a decree of pardon, they would pay for another bottle, otherwise I would pay. Never has a wagerer so ardently wished to lose!

Thus, by a bizarre twist of fate, conversing facetiously and drinking toasts, I finished the night on which I was condemned to the guillotine. I have wished so many times to know how my Judges ended their night, Napoleon III, the sweeper Kim, and the others who had contributed to saving the social order and the usurped Empire... but my desire has always remained unsatisfied.