LOVE!... for Miss Sara or for Miss Elisa? The problem, however simple, aroused in his soul a singular dismay, which was succeeded by a no less singular irritation. "Why trouble myself to resolve it," he concluded, "since settling down is denied me by other ideals?" Count di Rudio acted unconsciously, and in a different field, as does the man in whose brain prejudice has taken root, when faced with new ideas. He intuits the reasonableness of those ideas, but so it is! He stubbornly closes his eyes to the truth, and the very certainty that his idol is shattering makes him a more strenuous champion of the old fables and of falsehood.

And now, here is how the long drought in Count di Rudio's purse came to an end.

From the day the *coup d'état* had definitively triumphed, Vittor Hugo, having taken the path of exile, had established himself on the island of Jersey. There he published "L'Homme," a periodical from whose pages shone forth, with the intensity lent it by genius, the condemnation of the nefarious imperial policy. The hero of the 2nd of December, most sensitive to the stings of criticism, like any delinquent who aspires to glory, complained of it adroitly to the London Cabinet, which, with equal adroitness, fended him off. But when the complications of European politics indicated to England that Napoleon III was the sovereign suited to lend her a strong hand in the meditated enterprise of breaking the pride of the Czar, seconding the caprices of that man imposed itself as an act of wise diplomacy. And freedom of thought and the traditional broad hospitality of the English people were, at least in part, restricted and sacrificed to the true, or supposed, interests of the Nation.

Vittor Hugo was surrounded by various brilliant minds, whom Pianciani joined. That nest of intellectuals was suddenly thrown into disarray. And it seemed such a sacrilege that not even the French reactionaries dared to applaud.

Pianciani decided to take refuge once more in Londra. Before leaving the island, he dispatched, with his other papers, insuring it for ten thousand pounds, the manuscript of his "Storia dei Papi". The papers arrived at their destination; the manuscript disappeared. And it was rumoured that the Jesuits had taken possession of it, probably to cast it into the flames. The fact that the Insurance Company immediately paid out the handsome indemnity, without initiating the slightest inquiry, without uttering a word, added the colour of truth to such a rumour.

Pianciani and Count di Rudio met, and the Roman gentleman who, with his expansive cordiality, with his generous impulses, made his deformed face forgivable (smallpox had blunted his nose), welcomed the gentleman from Belluno as an equal. As they parted, and almost as an aside, the conversation fell upon the latter's financial straits.

"You could not have come at a better time!" said Pianciani. "I have undertaken to re-attempt the 'Storia dei Papi'. Will you be my amanuensis?"

The man accustomed to the ardours, the toils, the dangers of action, was confined to an armchair and made a virtue of that which he had always reputed a fatal flaw: patience. In compensation, he came into contact with men luminous for their genius, their character, their virilely borne sufferings, who frequented Pianciani's house: rebels persecuted, slandered, without roof, without bread, yet not vanquished... great in their loves, in their hatreds, in their utopias. A noble and proud company!

Most had a fixed idea that almost defined them. They attempted to convince, to draw the young amanuensis into their orbit.

Pianciani foresaw in the troubles gathering in the East the probable salvation of Italia. Liberolle, the historian, dreamt of the union of the Latin peoples, but with the predominance of France. Vittor Hugo could not be consoled for the foolishness of his Fatherland, dazzled by the equivocal splendour of the Court of Napoleon the Little. He had lost all faith in the virtue of a People insensible to great ideals, ready to shoot and be shot for the false charm of fatuous phrases. And his every outburst invariably concluded with the bitter sentence: "The people are a great child that wishes to be deceived!"

And among those modern figures there passed, now gentle and smiling, now flashing with a sinister light, the phantoms of History. They are nineteen centuries of glories and filth that, parading across the brief pages, renew in the Count's heart the tremors, the sorrows, the wrath of the generations that sleep in dust.

Nevertheless, in his mind, made turgid as it were by that vast entanglement, there arose, from time to time, two simple and smiling figures who stirred him more deeply than genius; who stripped emperors and pontiffs of every adornment, who thrust them back into their own vulgarity. They appeared to him constantly adorned with roses, the beautiful flower that was the emblem of his family, and a sense of serenity pervaded him and remained: a sense that mitigated the stench of the Vatican orgies; that took the horror from the curses which, from every corner of Italia, from every corner of Europe, were ever raised against the robbers who trafficked in the Fatherland, in humanity, in Christ.

Count di Rudio no longer debated them; they had become as a part of himself. Not that his ideas on this matter were clear and well-defined. Love, not unmindful of its customary arts, still dissembled its own vigour under the shelter of other affections more anciently rooted and in full flower. But he was persuaded, by now, to have found on his path the beautiful, the good, the chaste, stupendously incarnated. To see them, to absorb their radiance, to elevate himself... to feel less unhappy! He abandoned himself to the newest of sensations without any suspicion. When the revolutionary tempest seized him again, the festival of sentiment would be abruptly cut short; but he would carry into the trials a greater treasure of dear remembrances: noble affections lend wings to reach the arduous peaks!

And he longed, with ever more intense anxiety, for the day when, having received the compensation for his labours, he could present himself with head held high to Signora Mancherini, pay his debts like a gentleman, resume the course of the interrupted lessons; drink anew from that fount of the beautiful, the good, the chaste, captivating his young friends ever more to the cult of martyrs and heroes!

The day came. With what a light step he traversed the long road, with what a bound he climbed the stairs! Mamma Mancherini came forward and blocked the threshold with her ample and flourishing person. Whereupon he, immediately extending his hand... and the pounds, profusely begged pardon for the involuntary delay. But the lady looked at him with a suspicious air. The two young ladies ran up, and Count di Rudio learned, to his great surprise, that the rent had been paid at the end of every month. Miss Elisa again brought up the mysterious foreigner, and Sara affirmed that she had never given the due receipts to the Count, because the Count had not let himself be seen for a long time. But the plump Mancherini did not seem too satisfied and went away scowling, muttering: "Oh, what a mess, what a mess!"

In those days the Crimean War was limping along. From the first appearance of the troubles that led to that war, Giuseppe Mazzini had proposed to appeal to the unitary sentiment of Germany; to second the national aspirations of Italia and Hungary; to let a breath of new life flow through the Balkans; to form, in short, around the Muscovite Empire, a great bulwark of free States that would have compressed and paralysed Russia.

This concept was not displeasing to the Cabinet of Torino. But Napoleon III and England aimed not to provoke the hostility of Austria; to induce her, rather, to participate actively in their alliance. And it was precisely because Austria would never have decided to enter the campaign as long as the terrible hornet's nest of Italia hung about her neck, that the cooperation of the House of Savoia was willingly accepted, indeed, solicited. The Piedmontese army was the only strongly organized force; the only one deemed capable of precipitating events in our Peninsula.

Austria did not let herself be moved and thus spared the Italians the humiliation of seeing the heroes of our independence fight alongside the Croat hordes, to maintain on the European Continent "a sad projection of Asia."

And the meditated grandiose uprising of peoples was reduced, in practice, to a simple, long, tedious siege. England, shaken in her military prestige, short of soldiers, decided to open recruitment, to organize some foreign legions.

As soon as the appropriate decree was promulgated, di Rudio saw Fumagalli and Leoni appear before him. The latter had decided to leave for the Crimea and was coming for a farewell visit. "And if this is to be the last time," he said, shaking the Count's hand, "well then, for the last time, farewell!"

They went to pass the few hours remaining before departure in the Public House of a certain Shaw, the wife of one of our countrymen. It was precisely the meeting place for the recruits. The setting, of a parade-ground elegance, was already exceptionally animated... a confused animation, full of outbursts and laughter. Soldiers and civilians, in clusters, clapped each other on the shoulder; they exchanged nicknames and fat, cordial adjectives. In the secluded corners, some gentle figure, in a little hat, with a pale and tearful face. Flowers and green sprigs on every breast; bluish coils of cigarette smoke from almost every mouth.

But the din and confusion did not suit di Rudio's soul; all the more so because the sight of so many Italians, about to shed their blood for a cause he considered foreign to the Fatherland, reminded him of the sad times of the soldiers of fortune. And when Leoni, half in jest and half in earnest, said to him: "Come now, Moretto! Make up your mind and embark with us!" he, with excessive gruffness, asked him: "What harm have the Russians done you, that you should offer your youth as a holocaust, with the intent of increasing among them the number of widows and orphans?"

And Leoni: "In the Crimea the Italian colours are flying!"

"Any flag is a mockery when it does not stand as a symbol of truth and justice!"

The conversation was taking a bad turn. Fortunately, a conscript from Milano, picking up the thread of a previous discussion, expressed his regret for not having thought to bring with him "I Sepolcri" by Ugo Foscolo, which would have so greatly helped to shorten the hours of the crossing.

"I have a copy at home," di Rudio told him. "Accept it. It is an inexpensive edition, with margins full of scribbles, but they do not spoil the substance."

In four leaps he was at Baldwin's Garden. He climbed the stairs and entered his room, leaving the door ajar. He was already turning the chest of drawers upside down when, from the other side of the hallway, moans and sobs reached him clearly. What is this?

Stepping to his threshold, he found himself before Miss Sara who, blushing fleetingly and without waiting to be questioned, said: "Elisa is crying because she is convinced that you are leaving tonight for the Crimea. Love is consuming her. And she has also compromised herself in Mamma's eyes. It was that mess with the receipts... do you remember? Mamma has drawn everything from her heart, and the least she can expect now is a scolding. The mysterious foreigner is over there, despairing. It was Elisa who provided from her own savings... for everything, for everything!"

Count di Rudio squeezed, turned and turned, and upended the great poet; then, thrusting him furiously into the bottom of his pocket: "Tell Miss Elisa that the di Rudios are not soldiers of fortune. For Freedom... always! Mercenaries of foreign despots... never!"

And he descended the stairs precipitously. But the storm that Miss Sara's words had aroused followed him into the street; it entered, through the crack of the door, into Mrs. Shaw's Public House, it swirled all evening about his head... so much so that the talk and the literature and the politics and the din and the jumbled scene of the embarkation and the farewells reached his brain, not as a vivid and well-delineated reality, but almost as a pale re-enactment of images emerging confusedly from amid the mists of bygone times.

A second surprise awaited him. Returning home towards one o'clock, he saw, seated on the landing, a figure of a woman in a white dress... in the darkness it seemed to him phosphorescent. A moment of stupefaction seized him... and she rose and, retreating, seemed to vanish. He would have taken her for a ghost, had a door not creaked. Miss Elisa had spent so much of the night keeping watch, in tears perhaps, to be certain that the sea and the war had not stolen him from her.

And di Rudio, in the tumult that tried to overwhelm him, clung desperately to this concept: "Before the afternoon, disillusion her and flee!" With that resolution he went to bed; in that resolution the thoughts of the night, inspired by the painful memory of so many martyrs, living and dead, made him obstinate. When he presented himself, rigid and sure of himself, to the two young ladies, Elisa greeted him, saying: "Are you unwell? You are pale this morning!"

"It seems to me you are both pale!" observed her cousin. And she offered to prepare a cup of hot milk... Mamma, too, would appreciate it upon her return. When she was at the threshold she turned and, smiling: "Don't commit any foolishness. Every lost moment is stolen from your happiness and, by dint of hiding from each other, you might even end up not finding one another again. You love each other, you were born for each other, what is so difficult?" And she fled. The decisive moment had arrived. Elisa was nervously twisting one of her ribbons and di Rudio observed her, remaining at a respectful distance. He began by thanking her for all she had done for him. Any denial was useless... Sara had confided everything to him. The trouble was that he could not show her his gratitude save with words.

And he went on, summarizing the sad vicissitudes to which one who champions a holy and persecuted cause must submit. With what heart would he dare offer her his hand, drag her into his tumultuous life, into his misery? Where to find her a nest that would not, sooner or later, be contaminated and destroyed by the rage of men? Would it be wise, humane, honest to reserve an environment blighted by the dread of conspiracies, by the snares of arms, by the shrieking of chains, by the terror of blood, for children born to perpetuate the gentle maternal virtues? Childhood craves the kisses of smiling mouths; it wants to reflect serene eyes in its candid soul. And what else could he tell her; what happiness promise her, without resorting to false phrases? He had chosen, between two evils, the lesser; he had decided to go away... forever. He begged her to interpret his resolution with that correctness of sentiment which had suggested it to him; to keep a good memory of him.

Here, and only here, did Miss Elisa raise her face and fix her eyes upon him. With the acuteness of simple souls, she was able to plumb a soul. She expressed herself as a creature conscious of being able to dispose of her own destiny, with that calm and chaste eloquence which to some of my readers, accustomed to exalting "the opulence of the hip and the tremors of the flesh," might seem exhumed from some archaeological museum... Other times, other men, other loves!

To a soul like di Rudio's she could go forth without suspicion and without artifice: she would have preferred to be definitively rejected than to become his through feigned virtues. There were Italian women, she was not unaware, who had suppressed their serene aspirations, imposed solitude and silence upon their hearts so as not to become wives and mothers in calamitous times. She admired their austerity, but did not feel she could approve of it. The wicked freely raise the wicked, and should the good shirk the duty of raising those who will perpetuate honest traditions? The environment, which did not seem favourable for cultivating, in tender hearts, the gentle virtues he supposed in her, would favour the development of the masculine paternal virtues. To temper virile characters is a mission that refines a mother's pride. Or perhaps he believed her, like his ancient Roman women, fit only to preside over the good order of the kitchen and to spin wool? Should the agony of hearts that sweat blood, the terrible effort of muscles that swell to break chains, the tormented labour of intellects that seek equity and light everywhere, have left her indifferent? She had a profound sympathy for the Country which he had painted for her as so beautiful, so great, so unfortunate. The love she bore for her Fatherland did not make her jealous... to distract him from his aims, to blunt his generous impulses!? Precisely the contrary! They would work together, and with redoubled energy, for the triumph of Freedom. He had lit a flame that made her greater than herself... let him try to extinguish it, if he had the heart, if he had the strength!

The Count thought: "Blessed be the rosy mouth that conquers the eloquence of so many martyrs, living and dead!" Nevertheless, he insisted:

"No, Elisa! The conspirator is a solitary man even in the bosom of his family. He must, at times, forget he has a mother and wife and children. If his predestined hour arrives, he closes his ears to their prayer, he does not see their tears and he leaves... he leaves without confiding his secrets even to the air he breathes. If that hour comes—"

"A final embrace, a heart-wrenching, perhaps: but no indiscreet questions. Am I not certain that you can accomplish nothing of which I should have to blush!"

When Miss Sara re-entered with the cups and the milk, the lover who a moment before had wanted to flee far, far away, was on one knee. Clasping Elisa's hands in his, he kissed them, and kissed them... On the 9th of December 1855, a flame was legalized upon which misfortune hastened to blow, but in vain! The great vicissitudes of more than half a century, far from extinguishing it, were to make it ever and always stronger