IN September of 1857, while I was getting by as best I could, giving language lessons in Nottingham, an Italian exile, passing through that city, came to pay me a visit. He found himself in circumstances much more critical than mine. I assisted him and, that same day, he continued on his way. Arriving in Birmingham, he turned for help to Felice Orsini, who was, if I am not mistaken, a fellow townsman of his. In speaking of his adversities, he alluded to the visit paid to me. "By God!" exclaimed Felice Orsini. "The very man I am looking for!" And he wrote to me, asking me to meet him at the Great Northern station in London.

I had not seen Felice Orsini for a long time. But no sooner did the train enter, puffing, under the station's roof (Charing Cross) than I spied him standing amidst the crowd, with his cases and his jet-black mustache. A few seconds and I stood before him. "Where the devil have you been until now?" he said to me. And I told him. When I alluded to my marriage, his face darkened. "Then, farewell to patriotic plans!" I disabused him of that notion. Now, on the contrary, I had an even greater obligation to conspire and to fight... my son was not to have an enslaved and unhappy fatherland.

He asked me if I knew the reason for which he had arranged to meet me and, upon my negative reply, he invited me to leave the station. Once in the open he reminded me, without preamble, of the letter I had written to Giuseppe Mazzini and my proposal to deliver France by eliminating Napoleon. He had a mind to put that old idea of mine into action. The times seemed propitious to him. Was I still of the same opinion?

— What does Mazzini think of it?

At this, he made a gesture as if to say: Why do you speak to me of archaeology? And he reinforced his point by affirming that he no longer spoke with Mazzini. On the other hand Massarenti, the *alter ego* of the "prophet," was a discredit to the people of Bologna and would, when he got wind of the matter, undoubtedly denounce him. For this reason, too, it was necessary to leave Mazzini aside.

I ended by telling him that I was not averse to participating in the enterprise. But I wanted to see things clearly. Once Napoleon was killed, what would happen? What were his plans for the aftermath?

I repeat, in summary, his explanations. They reveal, if not the plan, the aims of a conspiracy about which much has been written, but without ever revealing the whole truth. They serve, at the same time, as a posthumous refutation of the criticisms that some historians, though lacking the necessary elements for judgement, wished to level at Orsini.

Felice Orsini had come to a full accord with the French Republicans. The *coup d'état* had surprised and paralyzed them, but not subdued them. They were conspiring to prepare a revolution. A successful bold stroke in Paris meant the liberation of France, and France risen again to liberty meant all of Europe in a ferment. Ledru Rollin—Orsini assured me—despairs of success so long as he finds himself facing the sinister figure of Napoleon. There is more power than one might think in a name. If France is stirred, Kossuth guarantees Hungary. As for our Italy... once Napoleon is eliminated, barricades are organized in Paris. The enemy, caught unawares, without an authoritative leader, with the cohesion of the army already undermined by subtle intrigues, falls ignominiously. The Republic is proclaimed and, immediately, I am named, with full powers, Commissioner to the French army stationed in Rome. These are thirty thousand battle-hardened and well-equipped men whom I win over, at a single stroke, to the Italian cause. What do I do? In a single day, I erase the work and the Napoleonic shame of 1849. The Pope and Cardinals become my prisoners and I lock them up in Castel Sant'Angelo... their fate will depend on the attitude of Europe. I, meanwhile, sever the temporal power from the spiritual and proclaim, from the Campidoglio, the Roman Republic risen again. The French garrison leaves Rome and I dispatch it rapidly to the aid of the Italian revolution. Do we win? So much the better! Do we suffer a setback? Republican France, stung to the quick, rises up like a fury and does not lay down its arms again until the prestige of its name is fully vindicated. Austria, attacked from every side, without friends in Europe, with rebellion flaring up within her own borders, is swept away and never again sets foot in Italy...

Of course, the definitive political settlement of the Peninsula would remain to be established. But there are things that, despite their vastness, almost settle themselves. The blind, stubborn dualism between republicans and monarchists has already proved fatal to the Italian People; the lesson has taught them. The People want independence and unity and now place all the rest in a secondary position. If the Savoyard Monarchy showed itself capable of giving them the strength they lack and of guiding them to victory, they would throw themselves, as one man, at the feet of Vittorio Emanuele. If victory comes to them from a republican Rome and from republican allies, what sovereign will feel himself so bold as to oppose the proclamation of the Republic?

At the present moment, the noble contest is open. Should we republicans spontaneously renounce the glorious initiative?

Everything depends on audacity! One must know how to cast the first spark. Without it there is no fire, independence is not possible, the Republic is not possible. You know that I am against the shedding of blood. Nature has endowed me with a humane temperament: I aim high, and the means imposed by these sad times are repugnant to me. But I say that the blood of Louis Bonaparte, of the man who has knowingly failed in his solemnly sworn commitments, who has betrayed us; who has put our Fatherland back in chains; who tramples upon every noble aspiration of his own Fatherland, must not weigh on the scale as much as the liberty of seventy million human creatures. To spill it prevents the sacrifice of thousands upon thousands of honest men, and the cruel act becomes a work of piety. Decide!

And I decided. The man's integrity was known to me; the French revolutionary substratum, more or less, known; the conditions of Italy, known. I deemed it superfluous to delve deeper and contented myself with asking the names of those who would physically carry out the plan. But Orsini demurred. The great danger in great conspiracies—he had me observe—is precisely their vastness. The more numerous are those who hold the secret in their hearts, the greater become the chances that some lip will let it slip. To obviate, in part, this inevitable danger, he had decided that the participants in the attempt should not know one another.

To shelter from the cold, which on that day was rather biting, we entered a "Public House." The conversation continued intermittently. Orsini was to be in Liverpool the next day, and he begged me to return to Nottingham. "Stay quiet at home and work, until I get in touch." If he could not come himself, he would send a trusted person, with a note from him and with his instructions. And for greater caution, we established a password. I asked him if, concerning the attempt, he already had some well-delineated plan. He knitted his brows and seemed displeased. Orsini did not know how to dissemble his own emotions. After a brief silence, he replied that he could not communicate anything precise to me. My intention—he added—would be to have ourselves invited to Court. There are those who are in a position to procure for us as many invitations as we desire. To approach the usurper during a ball is a matter of little moment, and one could, with a blade, succeed in the attempt, without spilling a drop more blood than necessary. But it is feared that the interested parties will close the palace doors and prevent the news of the event from spreading, until all the orders necessary to ward off the consequences have been given; until they have proclaimed the Regency. Perhaps it will be necessary to resort to a noisier means. Be that as it may... your word is given. Can I rely on you without fail?

I replied that Carlo di Rudio had never failed in his commitments and since, by simple intuition, it seemed to me that I had understood, more or less, what the "noisier means" might consist of, I observed to him that the usurper's retinue must necessarily be composed of supporters of the empire and of accomplices of the 2nd of December. The more of them one killed, the fewer we would find ourselves facing at the barricades on the morrow.

We parted that very evening. The next day, I was returning to Nottingham and going over in my mind, to the rhythm of the train, what had been confided to me and the probabilities of drawing from it a vast movement that would prove salutary to the popular cause throughout all of Europe, I understood at once what an immense advantage Mazzini's awareness of it would be. I knew no influence that was more profound and more effective than his. To leave such a man aside was to run the risk of losing the fruit of our audacity. The figure of the "Bolognese" came to my mind, but it did not seem to me of any great importance. I well knew that it was enough to relate with discretion and to request the promise of absolute silence, for the Master to face and overcome any torture, without letting a compromising syllable escape him. The "coward" of the Savoy expedition, as certain moderate gazettes called him, was undoubtedly among the most humanly courageous personalities of the century.

The disagreements between the Master and Orsini? I felt certain they would have vanished before the supreme interests of the fatherland. And from that moment, I resolved to open my soul to Mazzini, to confide in him just enough so that events would not catch him unawares.

My wife was happily surprised by my return, but she did not venture a single indiscreet question and, for several days, our life passed in its usual calm, as if nothing were in the air. Towards the middle of November, a letter was delivered to me, with the postmark of Birmingham. It contained these simple words: "Go to London and give me your address."

I understood that things were coming to a head and reflecting that, in all probability, once I left English soil I would never again be able to see either my wife or my child, I said curtly to Elisa: "Pack your trunk; I intend to establish myself in London!" She at once set about complying with my wish. I observed her. From her every act shone the loving conviction that she should not inquire further; that all I required of her was for a good end and for a just cause. She brushed, folded, put away, gentle and silent.

We left and took up residence in Bedman Building, on Shoah Square. Two days of waiting. On the morning of the third, I was tickling the baby on his throat, whom Elisa had just immersed in a basin of warm water, when a ring of the bell made me start. On the threshold, I found myself face to face with a well-dressed gentleman, evidently a foreigner; who, having asked if I was the person in question, without adding another word, handed me an open letter. It was from Felice Orsini, who begged me to have "full confidence in Simon Bernard, a French doctor from Carcassonne." For greater assurance, I asked for and received the password. Then I invited my visitor to enter.

The baby was kicking his legs in the basin and beat the water with his little hands, splashing the table. At that sight, Simon Bernard fixed his gaze on my face, as if putting a mute question to me; then he looked again at the baby and ended by casting a troubled and perplexed glance at my wife.

I thought I intuited the cause of his embarrassment and observed that he could speak freely in French; my wife would not understand a syllable of it.

"Oh, it is not precisely a matter of that!" And he became pensive again. Suddenly he seemed to make up his mind and, having recovered all the gallantry proper to his race, he launched into compliments to the mother on the robustness of her little one; to the husband for his good taste in the choice of a bride. He spoke of London, of its cursed climate; of France and the incomparable gaiety of Paris; he touched upon a hundred subjects, without delving into any of them, with an elegance of phrase, with a volubility of thought more appropriate to a drawing-room of idle gentlemen than to the humble room of a conspirator and among conspirators.

When he took his leave, I accompanied him to the door and he, touching my arm, said to me in a low voice: "Let us take a few steps in the square; we shall have the leisure to speak with more freedom."

As soon as I had gone down, he planted himself before me and, finally giving vent to the thought that had preoccupied him: "*Parbleu!* I did not know you were a family man!"

— Felice Orsini knows it.

— But the Secret Committee here in London does not know it. In any case, this visit was still necessary for us to make each other's acquaintance. The Committee meets tonight and I will report. We shall see each other again tomorrow.

And the following day he came. As soon as I opened the door to him, I noted that the expression on his face was that of a cheerful man. This time he risked speaking in Elisa's presence—in French, of course. He had nothing new regarding the conspiracy. But he was happy to announce to me that the Secret Committee had decided to pay my wife, during my absence, fourteen shillings a week. In case of misfortune, the allowance would be continued for her until my child had reached the age of fourteen.

Rightly or wrongly, the overriding concern of being able to serve the Fatherland had almost excluded from my mind that other one for the future. Elisa's mother belonged to the ranks of those women whose name cannot be separated from the idea of veneration. The certainty that she would not have left her daughter or the little one destitute had been enough to keep me, in this regard, perfectly at ease. And, to tell the truth, the news communicated to me by Simon Bernard, at first, jarred me. But did I have the right to give way to the impulse of pride; to impose upon weak and unknowing creatures the full weight of my actions? Would it have been honest to refuse?

I thanked him and Simon Bernard, giving urgent business as a pretext, on account of which, indeed, he would not be able to get in touch for some days, shook my hand and left. My surprise was therefore not slight when, the following morning, I found him again face to face on the threshold. He explained to me, without even crossing it, the motive for that unexpected visit. The Secret Committee had reconsidered its decision and had concluded that it could not place in jeopardy the existence of a man who had a wife and was a father. I was therefore dispensed, with a thousand thanks, from taking part in the affair. I contented myself with replying: "Very well. Let us speak of it no more!"