THE morrow, I was proceeding at full steam toward my destiny. To face it, I had my valise... between the leather and the thin board of its bottom, it concealed the fulminate of mercury and a blade that already, in the insurrectionary attempts of 1853, had known the beating of my heart. I had, moreover, a passport in the name of Giovanni da Sylva, a Portuguese, commercial traveler for a brewery, and about ten shillings. Money and passport had been delivered to me by Dr. Bernard, during our last colloquy. I had, above all, my youth and my courage. What would come of all this? The spark capable of modifying history, or naught else but desolation and death?

Having left the mouth of the Thames behind, we found a most agitated sea, nay, a veritable tempest. Stomach ailments and fright created great confusion on board. But the infinite, which roared on all sides, gave me an exaltation that redoubled my consciousness of life. For some time, a certain quietism had sought to overlay my nature, and this immersion, as it were, in force and motion seemed to regenerate me.

And yet the tempest itself, which I almost blessed, was, unknown to me, an answer from events to the question I had put to myself and which arose with great insistence in my mind. The steamer, slowed by the wind and the breakers, docked at Calais at five in the morning on the ninth of January... twelve hours late! And when, in Parigi, I alighted from the train, I searched in vain, amid the thronging crowd, for the noble figure of Felice Orsini. This mishap made a visit to his dwelling, on via Monthabor, imperative... a circumstance that was to have graver consequences than its seeming insignificance led me to suppose.

Here, in brief, is what occurred during that first visit of mine. Orsini's apartment was on the ground floor. The porter accompanies me to the door, knocks, and when the door opens, discreetly withdraws. I enter with a rush and am about to fraternally embrace Orsini, who stands erect and waiting, when I note the presence of a third person... a young man lounging familiarly in an armchair. He was fair-haired, his cheeks and lips were completely shaven, with the physiognomy of a good-natured priest. I then assumed the obsequious air of the commercial traveler and, stating the name on my passport, offered to submit to "Tomaso Allsop" some samples of beer.

I was rummaging in my valise, which had already been turned upside down by the Customs officers, when the feigned Allsop burst into sonorous laughter. "We are among friends," he said. And he introduced me, by my real name, to Antonio Gomez. He then asked for an explanation of my delay and, helping things along, said: "How Miss Cheney received you! She has delivered the affair to you!"

I overturned my few effects upon the table and set about removing the thin board that concealed the fulminate of mercury. A moment later, it was spread out upon a newspaper, "Le Droit", if memory does not deceive me. Felice Orsini went on caressing it with his fingertips, as if to ascertain its degree of humidity. His face, so mobile and open, had taken on a rigid expression of profound melancholy. He ended by saying: "The supply is now complete, and not for nothing shall we have melted down twelve apostles." And he sighed.

Struck by that melancholy air and by that sigh, I recalled his first project, inspired by the horror of bloodshed. Evidently, he was still keen to entrust the liberation of France to the blade.

"This devilry is very damp," he resumed, "we shall have to resort to the fireplace and the thermometer. But that does not concern you. I owe it to your wife and your son not to expose you more than is strictly necessary."

At that moment there was a knock at the door... undoubtedly a conventional sign, because Orsini was not discomposed and left the fulminate on the table, in plain sight.

A man of my own stature entered, with a grizzled beard and an intelligent eye; the pallor of his face rendered his black pupil extraordinarily intense. He was taken aback at seeing me and contented himself with uttering a simple, banal greeting. But his words resounded in the room in an extraordinary way. A voice, that was, which recalled the monotonous sound of a "bag pipe". It was the first time I had heard it, but it would have been enough for me to recognize it among a thousand, even many years later. And, right then, it seemed to me the man's most salient feature. Undoubtedly the great beard covered a full throat.

Felice Orsini made the introduction. Thus I personally met Giuseppe Pieri, with whom I had already had, by post, a brief correspondence. He at once struck up conversation with great familiarity, as if for long years we had shared good fortune and ill. So much for the practical effect of that prudent resolve of Orsini's, to reserve for himself exclusive knowledge of the participants in the attempt.

I intended to speak to him of it at the first opportunity, when he, as if to accentuate this unfortunate turn, interrupted Pieri's noisy loquacity: "By the way," he said to me, "where have you taken lodging?"

I observed to him that I had but recently arrived... only the time essential to eat a morsel at the first eating-house and to traverse the street. I was left with little money in my pocket. As the understanding was that I should lodge, for greater caution, in a first-rate hotel, I was thus awaiting his instructions.

"You know!" he resumed after scratching his head, "Our friend Pieri is lodging at the Hotel France et Champagne, on via Montmartre. He has a room with two beds. Go with him and things will be simplified."

He did not leave me time to raise objections. He had leaned his person backward and, having let his gaze run over each of us in turn, said: "A Venetian, a Tuscan, a Neapolitan, a Romagnol. And other, other strips of Italian land shall be represented in this proud enterprise! It is not this or that individual, not this or that region, but all of Italy that reawakens, that strives to smooth its own path to redemption. The meaning is high, and Europe will understand it. And this union of right hands that seek one another, today forcibly in secret, gives us faith in that other union which will be accomplished in the sight of the Peoples and in the light of the Sun... which will be accomplished, it will be accomplished!" And I lowered my head, and a powerful shudder ran through my bones, as if the great soul of a prophet had suddenly passed through the room!

Chapter Eight